>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING,
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
JUDY WOODRUFF. ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR. THE
DANGEROUS AND DEADLY PASSGEA
THE DANGEROUS AND DEADLY
PASSGEA INTO EUROPE.
INTO EUROPE. ON LAND
AND BY SEA, CASUALTIES
ON LAND AND BY SEA, CASUALTIES
RISE AS HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
MAKE A DESPERATE JOURNEY.
WE CONTINUE OUR SERIES ON
KATRINA, TEN YEARS LATER.
KATRINA, TEN YEARS LATER. AN
AMBITIOUS EXPERIMENT TO TURN
AN AMBITIOUS EXPERIMENT TO TURN
AROUND FAILING PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
BUT HAVE CHARTERS SUCCEEDED BY
BUT HAVE CHARTERS SUCCEEDED
BY BENDING THE RULES IN THEIR
BENDING THE RULES
IN THEIR FAVOR?
FAVOR? >> THEY WANNA
HAVE GREAT TEST
>> THEY WANNA HAVE
GREAT TEST SCORES.
SCORES. IF YOU'RE A
LOW TESTER AND I
IF YOU'RE A LOW TESTER AND I
REALLY WANT TO GET YOU OUT OF MY
SCHOOL, ONE OF THE TOOLS I'VE
SEEN USED IS SUSPENSION.
SEEN USED IS SUSPENSION. >>
Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ARE HERE TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
ARE HERE TO ANALYZE
THE WEEK'S NEWS.
NEWS. ALL THAT AND
MORE ON TONIGHT'S
ALL THAT AND MORE ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED NATIONS
REFUGEE AGENCY ANNOUNCED A
STRIKING FIGURE TODAY: THE
NUMBER OF REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
NUMBER OF REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS MAKING THE DANGEROUS
MAKING THE DANGEROUS
MEDITERRANEAN SEA CROSSING TO
REACH EUROPE THIS YEAR HAS NOW
REACH EUROPE THIS YEAR HAS
NOW PASSED THE 300,000 MARK.
PASSED THE 300,000 MARK. THAT'S
MORE THAN 40% HIGHER THAN
THAT'S MORE THAN 40% HIGHER THAN
THE RECORD NUMBER WHO MADE THE
THE RECORD NUMBER WHO MADE
THE CROSSING IN ALL OF 2014.
CROSSING IN ALL OF 2014. AND
THAT NUMBER DOESN'T INCLUDE
AND THAT NUMBER DOESN'T INCLUDE
THE 2,600 PEOPLE WHO HAVE DIED
THIS YEAR ON THE JOURNEY.
WE'LL HAVE AN ON THE GROUND
REPORT ON THIS GROWING CRISIS
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY. A
U.S. GOVERNMENT PROGRAM THAT
A U.S. GOVERNMENT PROGRAM THAT
COLLECTS THE TELEPHONE DATA OF
COLLECTS THE TELEPHONE DATA
OF MILLIONS OF AMERICANS CAN
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS CAN
CONTINUE FOR THE NEXT FEW
CONTINUE FOR THE
NEXT FEW MONTHS.
MONTHS. THAT WAS THE
RULING OF A FEDERAL
THAT WAS THE RULING OF A FEDERAL
APPEALS COURT JUDGES TODAY THAT
APPEALS COURT JUDGES TODAY
THAT FAVORED THE OBAMA
FAVORED THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S POSITION ON THE
N.S.A. SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM.
N.S.A. SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM. THE
PROGRAM EXPIRES IN NOVEMBER
THE PROGRAM EXPIRES IN NOVEMBER
AND CONGRESS HAS PASSED
LEGISLATION TO REPLACE IT WITH A
LEGISLATION TO REPLACE
IT WITH A NEW PROGRAM.
NEW PROGRAM. FOR MORE
ON THE RULING AND WHAT
FOR MORE ON THE RULING AND WHAT
IT MEANS, I'M JOINED BY DEVLIN
BARRETT OF "THE WALL STREET
BARRETT OF "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
JOURNAL." DEVLIN, WELCOME.
DEVLIN, WELCOME. WHAT WAS
IT THAT THE JUDGES WERE
WHAT WAS IT THAT THE JUDGES
WERE ASKED TO RULE ON?
ASKED TO RULE ON? >> WELL,
THE LOWER COURT JUDGE
>> WELL, THE LOWER COURT JUDGE
FOUND THAT THE PROGRAM WAS
FOUND THAT THE PROGRAM
WAS ALMOST CERTAINLY
ALMOST CERTAINLY
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, AND THE
GOVERNMENT APPEALED THAT
GOVERNMENT APPEALED
THAT DECISION.
DECISION. WHAT THIS
PANEL SAID TODAY WAS
WHAT THIS PANEL SAID TODAY WAS
THEY REVERSED THAT LOWER COURT
FINDING IN THE SENSE THAT THEY
SAID, LOOK, WE'RE GOING TO
OVERTURN WHAT'S CALLED THE
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION, WE'RE
NOT GOING TO LET THAT STAND, AND
WE'RE GOING TO TOSS THE CASE
BACK TO THROWER COURT JUDGE.
BACK TO THROWER COURT JUDGE. SO,
NOW, THAT JUDGE HAS TO MAKE
SO, NOW, THAT JUDGE HAS TO MAKE
SOME MORE FINDINGS OF FACT.
SOME MORE FINDINGS OF FACT. BUT
WHAT THE JUDGES DID BESIDE
BUT WHAT THE JUDGES DID BESIDE
JUST SENDING IT BACK TO THE
JUDGE, THEY SAID THEY HAVE A LOT
OF SKEPTICISM ABOUT WHETHER THE
PERSON WHO IS SUING CAN PROVE
HIS PHONE RECORDS WERE TAKEN AS
HIS PHONE RECORDS WERE TAKEN
AS PART OF THIS PROGRAM.
PART OF THIS PROGRAM. >>
Woodruff: SO WHAT'S THE
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT'S THE
PRACTICAL EFFECT OF THIS?
WHAT DOES THIS NINE FOR THE
N.S.A. AND WHETHER IT CAN
CONTINUE THIS COLLECTION OF THE
CONTINUE THIS COLLECTION
OF THE SO-CALLED METADATA?
SO-CALLED METADATA? >> WELL,
THAT COLLECTION IN ITS
>> WELL, THAT COLLECTION IN ITS
CURRENT FORM WILL ONLY CONTINUE
TILL THE END OF NOVEMBER UNDER A
TILL THE END OF NOVEMBER UNDER
A LAW PASSED THE SUMMER.
LAW PASSED THE SUMMER.
>> Woodruff: ANYWAY?
>> Woodruff: ANYWAY? RIGHT.
RIGHT. TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT, YOU'RE
TO A CERTAIN EXTENT, YOU'RE
SEEING THE LAWYERS AND JUDGES ON
EACH SIDE OF THIS ISSUE GETTING
THEIR LAST LICKS IN ON THIS
ISSUE BEFORE A LOT OF IT BECOMES
ISSUE BEFORE A LOT OF
IT BECOMES MOOT ANYWAY.
MOOT ANYWAY. BUT UNTIL
THEN, THERE ARE STILL
BUT UNTIL THEN, THERE ARE STILL
GOING TO BE FIGHTS IN NEW YORK
AND D.C. ABOUT WHETHER ANY OF
AND D.C. ABOUT WHETHER ANY
OF THIS WAS EVER LEGAL.
THIS WAS EVER LEGAL.
CERTAINLY THE PRIVACY GROUPS
WOULD LIKE TO GET MORE RULINGS
THAT SAY, NO, IT WASN'T.
THAT SAY, NO, IT WASN'T. MEAN
TIME, JUST THIS WEEK, THE
MEAN TIME, JUST THIS WEEK, THE
SURVEILLANCE COURT SAID, YES,
THIS WILL CONTINUE AND WILL
CONTINUE TILL THE END OF
NOVEMBER AND IS NOT A VIOLATION.
>> Woodruff: SO DOES THE FACT
THREE APPELLATE JUDGES HAVE HELD
THE WAY THEY HAVE, DOES THAT
WEIGH THE SCALE IN ONE WAY OR
THE OTHER, DO YOU THINK, MORE ON
THE OTHER, DO YOU THINK, MORE
ON WHETHER THIS COLLECTION IS
WHETHER THIS COLLECTION
IS CONSTITUTIONAL?
CONSTITUTIONAL? >> AT
THIS POINT, BOTH SIDES
>> AT THIS POINT, BOTH SIDES
HAVE A BUNCH OF RULINGS THEY CAN
POINT TO THAT BACK UP THEIR
POINT TO THAT BACK
UP THEIR CLAIMS.
CLAIMS. THERE IS AN
EQUALLY IMPORTANT
THERE IS AN EQUALLY IMPORTANT
APPEALS COURT DECISION IN
NEW YORK THAT SAYS CONGRESS
NEVER INTENDED FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TO EVER DO THIS WHEN
GOVERNMENT TO EVER DO THIS
WHEN IT PASSED THE LAW.
IT PASSED THE LAW. SO I
THINK A LOT OF THIS IS
SO I THINK A LOT OF
THIS IS UNDECIDED.
UNDECIDED. IT WILL BE
INTERESTING TO SEE IF
IT WILL BE INTERESTING TO SEE IF
ANYONE GETS A DECISIVE BLOW --
ONE LAST BLOW IN BEFORE THE
ONE LAST BLOW IN BEFORE
THE NOVEMBER DEADLINE.
NOVEMBER DEADLINE. >>
Woodruff: DEVLIN BARRETT OF
>> Woodruff: DEVLIN BARRETT OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL," WE
THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," WE THANK YOU.
THANK YOU. >> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: TROPICAL STORM
ERIKA HAS CLAIMED THEIVES L OF
FOUR PEOPLE AFTER BARRELING
THROUGH THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN
ISLAND OF DOMINICA, AND THAT
NUMBER IS EXPECTED TO RISE.
IT DUMPED 15 INCHES OF RAIN
THERE, TRIGGERING LANDSLIDES AND
THERE, TRIGGERING
LANDSLIDES AND FLOODING.
FLOODING. AT LEAST
20 PEOPLE ARE STILL
AT LEAST 20 PEOPLE
ARE STILL MISSING.
MISSING. THE STORM
IS NOW LOCATED SOUTH
THE STORM IS NOW LOCATED SOUTH
OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,
MOVING WEST WITH MAXIMUM
SUSTAINED WINDS OF 50 MILES PER
SUSTAINED WINDS OF
50 MILES PER HOUR.
HOUR. IT'S EXPECTED TO HIT SOUTH
IT'S EXPECTED TO HIT SOUTH
FLORIDA MONDAY, WHERE GOVERNOR
RICK SCOTT HAS ALREADY DECLARED
RICK SCOTT HAS ALREADY
DECLARED A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
A STATE OF EMERGENCY. >> WE
DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH LAND
>> WE DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
LAND IT'S GOING TO GO OVER.
IT'S GOING TO GO OVER. WE
DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH WATER
WE DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
WATER WE'RE GOING TO GET.
WE'RE GOING TO GET. BUT
CLEAR THELY STORM TRACK IS
BUT CLEAR THELY STORM TRACK IS
CONTINUING TO MOVE A LITTLE BIT
CONTINUING TO MOVE
A LITTLE BIT WEST.
WEST. HISTORICALLY,
AS YOU KNOW IN
HISTORICALLY, AS YOU KNOW IN
STORMS AND HURRICANES WE GET
MORE WATER IN THE STATE THE MORE
MORE WATER IN THE STATE THE
MORE THE STORM TRACK GOES WEST.
THE STORM TRACK GOES WEST.
>> Woodruff: FORECASTERS
ANTICIPATE ERIKA WILL LIKELY
WEAKEN TO A TROPICAL DEPRESSION
BEFORE IT REACHES FLORIDA.
GREECE SWORE IN A NEW CARETAKER
GOVERNMENT TODAY, AHEAD OF NEXT
MONTH'S NATIONAL ELECTION.
THE NEW PRIME MINISTER,
VASSILIKI THANOU, IS THE FIRST
WOMAN TO RUN THE COUNTRY.
WOMAN TO RUN THE COUNTRY. HER
TEMPORARY CABINET WILL BE
HER TEMPORARY CABINET WILL BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR OVERSEEING THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SEVERAL OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SEVERAL OF
THE CONDITIONS VITAL TO A NEW
CONDITIONS VITAL TO A NEW
FINANCIAL BAILOUT BY THE
EUROPEANS AND THE IMF.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS RESIGNED ONLY
SEVEN MONTHS INTO HIS TENURE AS
PRIME MINSTER AFTER A REVOLT
FROM WITHIN HIS RADICAL-LEFT
PARTY FROM THOSE OPPOSED TO
BAILOUT TERMS HE AGREED TO.
LAWMAKERS IN JAPAN SET NEW
TARGETS FOR EMPLOYERS TO HIRE
AND PROMOTE MORE WOMEN AS
AND PROMOTE MORE
WOMEN AS MANAGERS.
MANAGERS. THE RULES
ARE AN ATTEMPT TO
THE RULES ARE AN ATTEMPT TO
CLOSE WHAT HAS LONG BEEN ONE OF
THE STARKEST GENDER GAPS OF ANY
THE STARKEST GENDER GAPS
OF ANY DEVELOPED COUNTRY.
DEVELOPED COUNTRY. WOMEN
CURRENTLY ACCOUNT FOR ONLY
WOMEN CURRENTLY ACCOUNT FOR ONLY
11% OF SUPERVISORS IN JAPAN.
11% OF SUPERVISORS IN JAPAN. THE
NEW LAW IS EFFECTIVE FOR THE
THE NEW LAW IS EFFECTIVE FOR THE
NEXT TEN YEARS AND APPLIES TO
COMPANIES WITH MORE THAN 300
COMPANIES WITH MORE
THAN 300 EMPLOYEES.
EMPLOYEES. A FORMER
ARCHBISHOP CHARGED WITH
A FORMER ARCHBISHOP CHARGED WITH
SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN HAS
BEEN FOUND DEAD BEFORE HE COULD
STAND TRIAL FOR HIS ALLEGED
STAND TRIAL FOR HIS
ALLEGED CRIMES.
CRIMES. JOZEF WESOLOWSKI
WOULD HAVE BEEN
JOZEF WESOLOWSKI WOULD HAVE BEEN
THE HIGHEST-RANKING VATICAN
OFFICIAL TO COME BEFORE A
OFFICIAL TO COME
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL.
TRIBUNAL. BUT HE
FELL ILL BEFORE THE
BUT HE FELL ILL BEFORE THE
TRIAL'S JULY START DATE.
TRIAL'S JULY START DATE. ALREADY
DEFROCKED, HE DIED WHILE
ALREADY DEFROCKED, HE DIED WHILE
UNDER HOUSE ARREST IN VATICAN
UNDER HOUSE ARREST
IN VATICAN CITY.
CITY. INITIAL
FINDINGS INDICATE HIS
INITIAL FINDINGS INDICATE HIS
DEATH WAS FROM NATURAL CAUSES.
AFTER A VOLATILE WEEK OF
TRADING, MARKETS WERE MIXED BOTH
IN THE U.S. AND OVERSEAS TODAY
AS A MID-WEEKLY RALLY FADED.
ON WALL STREET, THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST NEARLY
12 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 16,643.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 15
POINTS AND THE S&P 500 ADDED A
POINTS AND THE S&P
500 ADDED A POINT.
POINT. FOR THE WEEK,
THE DOW GAINED
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW GAINED
MORE THAN A PERCENT, THE NASDAQ
ROSE 2.5% AND THE S&P WAS UP
ROSE 2.5% AND THE S&P
WAS UP NEARLY 1%.
NEARLY 1%. STILL TO
COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
A DEADLY WEEK FOR MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES STRUGGLING TO GET TO
EUROPE OVER LAND AND BY SEA.
A LOOK AT THE NEW ORLEANS
OVERHAUL OF ITS PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM, RELYING OVERWHELMINGLY
ON CHARTER SCHOOLS.
AND MUCH MORE.
THERE'S MORE TRAGEDY TO REPORT
TONIGHT AS DESPERATE REFUGEES
AND MIGRANTS CONTINUE TO MAKE
THERE WAY TOWARD AND THROUGH
THERE WAY TOWARD AND
THROUGH EUROPE.
EUROPE. HUNDREDS ARE
FEARED DEAD JUST
HUNDREDS ARE FEARED DEAD JUST
OFF THE COAST OF LIBYA AND THE
NUMBER OF VICTIMS FOUND DEAD IN
A TRUCK IN AUSTRIA ROSE TO MORE
A TRUCK IN AUSTRIA
ROSE TO MORE THAN 70.
THAN 70. LINDSEY
HILSUM OF INDEPENDENT
LINDSEY HILSUM OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS.
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS. >>
Reporter: THE FIRST COFFINS
>> Reporter: THE FIRST COFFINS
OF THE 71 PEOPLE FOUND DEAD IN A
TRUCK AT THE ROADSIDE YESTERDAY
MAY BE THE ONLY TIME THEY HAVE
BEEN TREATED WITH DIGNITY IN
BEEN TREATED WITH
DIGNITY IN WEEKS.
WEEKS. 59 MEN, EIGHT WOMEN, FOUR
59 MEN, EIGHT WOMEN, FOUR
CHILDREN AMONGST THE BODIES BOF
SYRIAN IDENTITY DOCUMENTS.
>> WE HAVE CONFIRMED THE
INSULATING LAYER ON THE SIDES OF
THE TRUCK DIDN'T ALLOW ANY AIR
THE TRUCK DIDN'T ALLOW
ANY AIR TO PASS THROUGH.
TO PASS THROUGH. WE CAN
NEITHER RULE IN OR OUT
WE CAN NEITHER RULE IN OR OUT
WHETHER THEY INSURED AIR CAME
THROUGH THE COOLING SYSTEM OR
THROUGH THE COOLING
SYSTEM OR THE ROOF.
THE ROOF. I BELIEVE
THAT, MOST LIKELY, THE
I BELIEVE THAT, MOST LIKELY,
THE PEOPLE IN HERE SUFFOCATED.
PEOPLE IN HERE SUFFOCATED. >>
Reporter: THE TRUCK PASSED
>> Reporter: THE TRUCK PASSED
NO BORDER CONTROLS WHEN IT
ENTERED AUSTRIA FROM HUNGARY.
>> I THINK THE ISSUE IS NOT TO
>> I THINK THE ISSUE IS NOT
TO MAKE MORE BORDER CHECKS.
MAKE MORE BORDER CHECKS. I
THINK IT'S TO FIND EASIER WAYS
I THINK IT'S TO FIND
EASIER WAYS TO EUROPE.
TO EUROPE. ON THE ONE
SIDE YOU CAN PROTECT
ON THE ONE SIDE YOU CAN PROTECT
THE REFUGEES, ON THE OTHER SIDE
IS THE BEST IN THE GOVERNMENTS.
>> Reporter: THIS MORNING'S
SCENES ON THE LIBYAN COAST MAKE
THAT APPEAR EVEN LESS LIKELY.
UP TO 200 PEOPLE DROWNED FROM
TWO BOATS TRYING TO REACH ITALY.
DEATHS AT SEA, DEATHS IN A
DEATHS AT SEA, DEATHS IN
A REFRIGERATED TRUCK.
REFRIGERATED TRUCK.
COFFINS OR BODY BAGS.
COFFINS OR BODY BAGS. IT'S
PRIMARILY AFRICANS WHO SET
IT'S PRIMARILY AFRICANS WHO SET
OUT FROM LIBYA, BUT SYRIANS WERE
OUT FROM LIBYA, BUT SYRIANS
WERE ALSO AMONGST THOSE RESCUED
ALSO AMONGST THOSE
RESCUED YESTERDAY.
YESTERDAY. >> WE HAVE
BEEN FORCED TO TAKE
>> WE HAVE BEEN FORCED
TO TAKE THIS ROUTE.
THIS ROUTE. IT'S CALLED
THE ROUTE OF DEATH.
IT'S CALLED THE ROUTE OF DEATH.
WE NOW CALL IT THE GRAVEYARD OF
WE NOW CALL IT THE GRAVEYARD
OF THE MEDITERRANEAN.
THE MEDITERRANEAN. SPHOO
SUCH IMAGES DO LITTLE TO
SPHOO SUCH IMAGES DO LITTLE TO
BRICK THE CONSCIENCE OF THOSE
WHO BELIEVE EUROPE CAN NEITHER
ABSORB MIGRANTS SEEKING A BETTER
LIFE, NOR REFUGEES FLEEING
LIFE, NOR REFUGEES
FLEEING CONFLICT.
CONFLICT. BUT THIS
MORNING AT AUSTRIA'S
BUT THIS MORNING AT AUSTRIA'S
OVER CROWDED REFUGEE CAMP SOUTH
OF VIENNA, WE FOUND VOLUNTEERS
OF VIENNA, WE FOUND
VOLUNTEERS BRINGING AID.
BRINGING AID. >> WE
WANT TO DO SOMETHING.
>> WE WANT TO DO SOMETHING.
THEY'RE NOT TALKING AND
LISTENING AND READING ON
Facebook AND OTHER SOCIAL
Facebook AND OTHER
SOCIAL MEDIA, HELPING.
MEDIA, HELPING. >> CLOTHES.
>> CLOTHES. PEOPLE ARE
COLLECTING THINGS IN
PEOPLE ARE COLLECTING THINGS IN
THEIR HOMES THAT WE COULD USE.
>> Reporter: THE BUILDING,
>> Reporter: THE BUILDING, ONCE
THE ARTILLERY CADET SCHOOL
ONCE THE ARTILLERY CADET SCHOOL
WAS CONVERTED IN 1956 TO HOUSE
HUNGARIANS FLEEING THE SOVIETS,
NOW IT'S SHELTERING PEOPLE
FLEEING TO, NOT FROM HUNGARY.
THE CONDITIONS ARE CRITICIZED IN
WHICH 5,000 REFUGEES LIVE, AND
WHICH 5,000 REFUGEES LIVE,
AND INDIVIDUAL AUSTRIANS ARE
INDIVIDUAL AUSTRIANS
ARE STARTING TO HELP.
STARTING TO HELP. >> PEOPLE
HERE ARE VERY, VERY,
>> PEOPLE HERE ARE
VERY, VERY, VERY GOOD.
VERY GOOD. THEY RESPECT
SYRIA, AND THEY
THEY RESPECT SYRIA, AND THEY
GIVE US MANY HELP FROM CLOTHES
AND ANYTHING WE WANT.
AND ANYTHING WE WANT. >>
Reporter: THAT'S GOOD.
>> Reporter: THAT'S GOOD. YEAH.
YEAH. >> Reporter:
SO WHAT IS YOUR
>> Reporter: SO
WHAT IS YOUR DREAM?
DREAM? WHAT ARE
YOU HOPING TO DO?
WHAT ARE YOU HOPING
TO DO? >> DREAM?
>> DREAM? I HOPE TO STUDY HERE.
I HOPE TO STUDY HERE. BECAUSE
IN SYRIA I WAS STUDYING
BECAUSE IN SYRIA I WAS STUDYING
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING, AND I
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING, AND
I HOPE TO COMPLETE MYNIY
HOPE TO COMPLETE MYNIY HERE.
HERE. >> Reporter:
ACROSS EUROPE,
>> Reporter: ACROSS EUROPE,
NOT LEAST HERE IN AUSTRIA,
POLITICIANS FEAR ANTI-IMMIGRANT
PRESSURE GROUPS, HENCE THE TOUGH
PRESSURE GROUPS, HENCE THE
TOUGH ANTI-FOREIGNER TALK.
ANTI-FOREIGNER TALK. BUT
THERE ARE OTHER VOICES,
BUT THERE ARE OTHER
VOICES, OTHER VIEWS.
OTHER VIEWS. >>
Woodruff: TODAY, GERMAN
>> Woodruff: TODAY, GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL SAID
THAT EUROPEAN UNION MINISTERS
WILL BE LOOKING INTO RAPID
CHANGES TO THE ASYLUM SYSTEM.
NEXT, WE CONCLUDE OUR WEEKLONG
SERIES ABOUT HOW NEW ORLEANS AND
PARTS OF THE GULF COAST ARE
HURRICANE KATRINA HIT.
HURRICANE KATRINA HIT. THIS
WEEKEND MARKS THE TENTH
THIS WEEKEND MARKS THE TENTH
ANNIVERSARY OF WHEN THE STORM
STRUCK AND IN THE DAYS AFTER
WHEN THE LEVEES BROKE, LEAVING
WHEN THE LEVEES BROKE,
LEAVING THE CITY FLOODED.
THE CITY FLOODED. PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH-- WHOSE
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH-- WHOSE
RESPONSE TO KATRINA WAS ROUNDLY
CRITICIZED-- RETURNED TO NEW
CRITICIZED-- RETURNED
TO NEW ORLEANS TODAY.
ORLEANS TODAY. HE PRAISED
THE CITY'S RECOVERY
HE PRAISED THE CITY'S
RECOVERY AND RESILIENCE.
AND RESILIENCE. IN A
SPEECH AT A CHARTER HIGH
IN A SPEECH AT A CHARTER HIGH
SCHOOL THAT HE SAID CAPTURED THE
SCHOOL SYSTEM'S TURNAROUND.
SCHOOL SYSTEM'S TURNAROUND. >>
THE GROUND WE'RE ON TODAY WAS
>> THE GROUND WE'RE ON
TODAY WAS UNDERWATER.
UNDERWATER. ALL OF US
WHO ARE OLD ENOUGH TO
ALL OF US WHO ARE OLD ENOUGH TO
REMEMBER WILL NEVER FORGET THE
IMAGES OF OUR FELLOW AMERICANS
AMID A SEA OF MISERY AND RUIN.
WE'LL ALWAYS REMEMBER THE LIVES
LOST ACROSS THE GULF COAST.
THEIR MEMORIES ARE IN OUR
HEARTS, AND I HOPE YOU PRAY FOR
HEARTS, AND I HOPE YOU
PRAY FOR THEIR FAMILIES.
THEIR FAMILIES. IN A
CRUEL TWIST, HURRICANE
IN A CRUEL TWIST, HURRICANE
KATRINA BROUGHT DESPAIR DURING
WHAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN A SEASON
OF HOPE: THE START OF A NEW
OF HOPE: THE START OF
A NEW SCHOOL YEAR.
SCHOOL YEAR. STUDENTS
WHO HAD RECENTLY GONE
STUDENTS WHO HAD RECENTLY GONE
BACK TO SCHOOL SUDDENLY HAD NO
BACK TO SCHOOL SUDDENLY HAD
NO SCHOOL TO GO BACK TO.
SCHOOL TO GO BACK TO.
MANY HAD NOWHERE TO LIVE.
MANY HAD NOWHERE TO LIVE. THE
FLOODWATERS, AS YOU ALL KNOW
THE FLOODWATERS, AS YOU ALL
KNOW BETTER THAN MOST, CLAIMED
BETTER THAN MOST, CLAIMED
SCHOOLS AND HOMES ALIKE.
SCHOOLS AND HOMES ALIKE. I
HOPE YOU REMEMBER WHAT I
I HOPE YOU REMEMBER WHAT I
REMEMBER AND THAT WAS THE
THOUSANDS WHO CAME HERE ON A
VOLUNTEER BASIS TO PROVIDE FOOD
FOR THE HUNGRY AND TO HELP FIND
SHELTER FOR THOSE WHO HAD NO
SHELTER FOR THOSE WHO
HAD NO HOME TO LIVE IN.
HOME TO LIVE IN. ONE OF
THE GROUPS THAT STEPPED
ONE OF THE GROUPS THAT STEPPED
FORWARD TO SERVE WERE THE
EDUCATORS OF NEW ORLEANS.
EDUCATORS OF NEW ORLEANS. AT
A TIME WHEN IT WOULD HAVE
AT A TIME WHEN IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN EASY TO WALK AWAY FROM THE
WRECKAGE, THE EDUCATORS HERE
TODAY THOUGHT OF THE CHILDREN
WHO WOULD BE LEFT BEHIND.
WHO WOULD BE LEFT BEHIND. YOU
UNDERSTOOD THAT BRINGING NEW
YOU UNDERSTOOD THAT BRINGING NEW
ORLEANS BACK TO LIFE REQUIRED
GETTING STUDENTS BACK TO SCHOOL.
AND EVEN THOUGH SOME OF THE
EDUCATORS HAD LOST ALMOST
EVERYTHING YOU OWNED, YOU LET
NOTHING STAND IN YOUR WAY.
TODAY WE CELEBRATE THE
RESURGENCE OF NEW ORLEANS
RESURGENCE OF NEW
ORLEANS SCHOOLS.
SCHOOLS. WE HONOR
THE RESILIENCE OF A
WE HONOR THE RESILIENCE OF A
GREAT AMERICAN CITY WHOSE LEVEES
GAVE OUT, BUT WHOSE PEOPLE NEVER
GAVE OUT, BUT WHOSE
PEOPLE NEVER GAVE UP.
GAVE UP. >> Woodruff:
THAT BRINGS US
>> Woodruff: THAT BRINGS US
APPROPRIATELY TO OUR LOOK AT
WHAT'S HAPPENED TO NEW ORLEANS'
SCHOOLS OVER THE COURSE OF THE
PAST DECADE AND THE BIG CHANGES
THAT THEY HAVE UNDERGONE.
THAT THEY HAVE UNDERGONE. IT'S
A STORY WE'VE REPORTED ON
IT'S A STORY WE'VE REPORTED
ON CLOSELY THROUGHOUT.
CLOSELY THROUGHOUT.
TONIGHT, JOHN TULENKO OF
EDUCATION WEEK, WHICH PRODUCES
STORIES FOR THE NEWSHOUR, HAS
STORIES FOR THE NEWSHOUR,
HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: AS
YOU CAN SEE, IN
>> Reporter: AS YOU CAN SEE, IN
PARTS OF NEW ORLEANS LIFE SEEMS
TO BE GETTING BACK TO NORMAL TEN
TO BE GETTING BACK TO NORMAL
TEN YEARS AFTER KATRINA.
YEARS AFTER KATRINA. BUT
MANY FOLKS ARE WONDERING
BUT MANY FOLKS ARE WONDERING
ABOUT THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
ABOUT THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. FOR
THE LAST 10 YEARS, THEY HAVE
FOR THE LAST 10 YEARS, THEY HAVE
BEEN ENGAGED IN WHAT SOME HAVE
CALLED THE MOST AMBITIOUS
EXPERIMENT EVER IN PUBLIC
EXPERIMENT EVER IN
PUBLIC EDUCATION.
EDUCATION. AND WHETHER
OR NOT IT'S WORKING
AND WHETHER OR NOT IT'S WORKING
DEPENDS ON WHOM YOU ASK.
DEPENDS ON WHOM YOU ASK. >>
I DO SEE IMPROVEMENT IN THE
>> I DO SEE IMPROVEMENT IN
THE KIDS AND IN THE SCHOOLS.
KIDS AND IN THE SCHOOLS. >>
Reporter: IS IT WORKING?
>> Reporter: IS IT
WORKING? >> NO.
>> NO. >> THE CHARTER
SCHOOL SYSTEM HAS
>> THE CHARTER SCHOOL SYSTEM HAS
DONE TREMENDOUSLY WELL FOR THE
DONE TREMENDOUSLY WELL
FOR THE LOCAL KIDS HERE.
LOCAL KIDS HERE. >> IT'S
WORKING FOR THOSE WHO
>> IT'S WORKING FOR THOSE WHO
HAVE THEIR MONY, TEHEIR HAND IN
HAVE THEIR MONY, TEHEIR
HAND IN THE COOKIE JAR.
THE COOKIE JAR. >> I THINK
THEY ARE BETTER THAN
>> I THINK THEY ARE BETTER
THAN THEY WERE 10 YEARS AGO.
THEY WERE 10 YEARS AGO. >>
Reporter: 10 YEARS AGO, NEW
>> Reporter: 10 YEARS AGO, NEW
ORLEANS PUBLIC SCHOOLS WERE
HEADED FOR ROCK BOTTOM.
HEADED FOR ROCK BOTTOM. FEWER
THAN A THIRD OF EIGHTH
FEWER THAN A THIRD OF EIGHTH
GRADERS COULD PASS A READING
GRADERS COULD PASS
A READING TEST.
TEST. AND CORRUPTION
WAS SO DEEP THE
AND CORRUPTION WAS SO DEEP THE
FBI HAD SET UP AN OFFICE INSIDE
THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION
THE SCHOOL
ADMINISTRATION BUILDING.
BUILDING. PATRICK DOBARD,
WHO OVERSEES THE
PATRICK DOBARD, WHO OVERSEES THE
SCHOOLS TODAY, REMEMBERS HOW BAD
SCHOOLS TODAY, REMEMBERS
HOW BAD IT WAS.
IT WAS. >> ORLEANS
PARISH SCHOOL BOARD
>> ORLEANS PARISH SCHOOL BOARD
AT THAT TIME, UNFORTUNATELY, IT
WAS REALLY ACADEMICALLY AND IN
WAS REALLY ACADEMICALLY AND
IN SOME INSTANCES MORALLY AND
SOME INSTANCES MORALLY AND
FINANCIALLY BANKRUPT.
AND THEN KATRINA CAME.
AND THEN KATRINA CAME. WHEN
YOU HAVE A CATASTROPHE LIKE
WHEN YOU HAVE A CATASTROPHE LIKE
THAT, IT IS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
THAT, IT IS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO START ANEW.
START ANEW. BECAUSE A LOT OF THE
BECAUSE A LOT OF THE
INSTITUTIONAL BARRIERS, BOTH
REAL AND PERCEIVED, WERE
LITERALLY AND FIGURATIVELY, AND
UNFORTUNATELY WASHED AWAY.
UNFORTUNATELY WASHED AWAY. >>
Reporter: SEIZING THE MOMENT,
>> Reporter: SEIZING THE MOMENT,
THE STATE TOOK CONTROL OF THE
THE STATE TOOK CONTROL OF
THE CITY'S FAILING SCHOOLS.
CITY'S FAILING SCHOOLS.
PINK SLIPS WERE SENT TO ALL
5,000 TEACHERS AND THE STATE SET
OUT TO REMAKE NEW ORLEANS AS A
OUT TO REMAKE NEW ORLEANS AS
A CITY WHERE NEARLY ALL THE
CITY WHERE NEARLY ALL THE
SCHOOLS WOULD BE INDEPENDENTLY
SCHOOLS WOULD BE
INDEPENDENTLY RUN CHARTERS.
RUN CHARTERS. LOCAL
SCHOOL OFFICIALS WERE NO
LOCAL SCHOOL OFFICIALS
WERE NO LONGER IN CHARGE.
LONGER IN CHARGE. >>
I'LL KNOW YOU'RE READY
>> I'LL KNOW YOU'RE READY
BECAUSE YOUR EYES WILL BE JUST
BECAUSE YOUR EYES
WILL BE JUST ON ME.
ON ME. THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU SO MUCH. >>
Reporter: SOME CHARTERS SPLIT
>> Reporter: SOME CHARTERS
SPLIT UP THE BOYS AND GIRLS.
UP THE BOYS AND GIRLS.
OTHERS FOCUSED ON THE ARTS.
MOST INTRODUCED UNIFORMS AND
STRICT RULES, AND ALL WERE TO BE
HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR RESULTS.
>> YOU HAVE A FIVE-YEAR
>> YOU HAVE A
FIVE-YEAR CONTRACT.
CONTRACT. AND IF YOU
DON'T MEET THE TERMS
AND IF YOU DON'T MEET THE TERMS
OF THAT CONTRACT, WE HAVE THE
ABILITY TO NOT ALLOW YOU TO
ABILITY TO NOT ALLOW YOU
TO CONTINUE IN EXISTENCE.
CONTINUE IN EXISTENCE.
>> Reporter: CHARTERS WERE NEW
>> Reporter: CHARTERS
WERE NEW AND DIFRENTFE.
AND DIFRENTFE. AND IT
TOOK SOME GETTING USED TO
AND IT TOOK SOME GETTING USED TO
FOR PARENTS LIKE CHERYL GRIFFIN.
>> THE FIRST TIME I CAME TO A
MEETING HERE, I'LL TELL YOU THE
MEETING HERE, I'LL TELL
YOU THE TRUTH, I WAS LIKE
TRUTH, I WAS LIKE "WHAT
KIND OF CRAP IS THIS
"WHAT KIND OF CRAP
IS THIS BOJANGLE?
BOJANGLE? WHAT ARE THEY DOING?
WHAT ARE THEY DOING? I AM
NOT GONNA BE A PART OF
I AM NOT GONNA BE
A PART OF THIS."
THIS." BUT THEN I
SAW THAT SUMMER GOT
BUT THEN I SAW THAT SUMMER
GOT IT THIS WAY, I SAID
IT THIS WAY, I SAID "WELL,
THAT'S THE PROCESS.
"WELL, THAT'S THE PROCESS.
THE PROCESS IS TO GET IT."
THE PROCESS IS TO GET
IT." SHE LOVES IT.
SHE LOVES IT. >>
DEFINITELY THE TEACHERS.
>> DEFINITELY THE TEACHERS.
THEY HAVE EXCELLENT TEACHERS.
THEY HAVE MORE THINGS FOR KIDS
THEY HAVE MORE
THINGS FOR KIDS TO
TO >> Reporter:
MICHAEL FRANKLIN IS
>> Reporter: MICHAEL FRANKLIN IS
ANOTHER PARENT WHO WAS WON OVER.
>> THERE ARE MORE WAYS TO HELP
KIDS AND GET KIDS TO ACHIEVE
KIDS AND GET KIDS TO
ACHIEVE THEIR POTENTIAL.
THEIR POTENTIAL. >> NEW
SCHOOLS WERE OPENING
>> NEW SCHOOLS WERE OPENING
EVERY YEAR AND THE RESULTS
LOOKED PROMISING.
LOOKED PROMISING. >> WE
NT UWEP IN EVERY GRADE IN
>> WE NT UWEP IN EVERY
GRADE IN EVERY SUBJECT.
EVERY SUBJECT.
>> Reporter: TODAY, GRADUATION
RATES HAVE CLIMBED FROM 54% TO
RATES HAVE CLIMBED
FROM 54% TO 73%.
73%. TEST SCORES
ARE SUBSTANTIALLY
TEST SCORES ARE SUBSTANTIALLY
HIGHER, AND MORE STUDENTS ARE
HIGHER, AND MORE STUDENTS
ARE ENROLLING IN COLLEGE.
ENROLLING IN COLLEGE. FOR
SOME, NEW ORLEANS HAS BECOME
FOR SOME, NEW ORLEANS HAS BECOME
A MODEL OF URBAN SCHOOL REFORM.
>> WHEN I THINK ABOUT NATIONALLY
PEOPLE LOOKING AT IT, IT MAKES
ME REALIZE HOW BIG THIS IS.
BECAUSE WHAT WE'RE DOING IS
BECAUSE WHAT WE'RE DOING
IS EXTREMELY DIFFERENT AND
EXTREMELY DIFFERENT AND
PROGRESSIVE, BUT IT'S ALSO, IN
MY MIND, LIKE THE FUNDAMENTAL
THINGS WE SHOULD BE DOING ACROSS
THINGS WE SHOULD BE DOING
ACROSS THIS NATION REGARDLESS.
THIS NATION REGARDLESS.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE IS
ANOTHER SIDE TO THIS STORY.
SOME SAY CHARTER SCHOOLS,
OPERATING WITH LITTLE OVERSIGHT,
HAVE SUCCEEDED BY BENDING THE
HAVE SUCCEEDED BY BENDING
THE RULES IN THEIR FAVOR.
RULES IN THEIR FAVOR. >>
SO, YOUR SHOES CANNOT HAVE
>> SO, YOUR SHOES CANNOT
HAVE GRAY ON THEM.
GRAY ON THEM. MUST BE
ALL WHITE OR ALL BLACK.
MUST BE ALL WHITE OR ALL BLACK.
>> Reporter: CRITICS POINT IN
PARTICULAR TO SCHOOL DISCIPLINE
CODES, WHICH CHARTERS WRITE
CODES, WHICH CHARTERS
WRITE THEMSELVES.
THEMSELVES. >> THE
RULES, LIKE A LOT OF THE
>> THE RULES, LIKE A LOT OF
THE SCHOOLS HAVE RULES CALLED
SCHOOLS HAVE RULES CALLED
WILLFUL DISOBEDIENCE, RIGHT?
WILLFUL DISOBEDIENCE,
RIGHT? WHICH IS SUBJECTIVE.
WHICH IS SUBJECTIVE. IT'S
ANYTHING I WANT IT TO BE.
IT'S ANYTHING I WANT IT TO BE.
>> Reporter: FOR 10 YEARS,
ASHANA BIGARD HAS BEEN HELPING
PARENTS NAVIGATE THE SCHOOLS
PARENTS NAVIGATE
THE SCHOOLS HERE.
HERE. HER DAUGHTERS
ATTENDED LOCAL
HER DAUGHTERS ATTENDED
LOCAL CHARTER SCHOOLS.
CHARTER SCHOOLS. >> SO
WILLFUL DISOBEDIEN COUCELD
>> SO WILLFUL DISOBEDIEN COUCELD
BE ANYTHING FROM YOU NOT
TRACKING THE TEACHER WITH YOUR
EYES TO BEING PERCEIVED AS
COUGHING TOO MUCH IN THE
COUGHING TOO MUCH
IN THE CLASSROOM.
CLASSROOM. >> Reporter:
THE PUNISHMENT FOR
>> Reporter: THE PUNISHMENT
FOR THAT IS WHAT?
THAT IS WHAT? >> A LOT
OF TIMES, SUSPENSION.
>> A LOT OF TIMES, SUSPENSION.
>> THEY WASN'T INTERESTED IN
TRYING TO HELP A PROBLEM CHILD,
TRYING TO HELP A PROBLEM
CHILD, I WOULD SAY THAT.
I WOULD SAY THAT. WEREN'T
INTERESTED IN SEEING
WEREN'T INTERESTED IN SEEING
WHAT YOUR ISSUES WERE AT HOME OR
WHY YOU ARE COMING TO SCHOOL AND
WHY YOU ARE COMING TO SCHOOL
AND HAVING A BAD DAY.
HAVING A BAD DAY. IT WAS
FIVE DAYS AND GO HOME.
IT WAS FIVE DAYS AND GO HOME. >>
Reporter: ANTONIO TRAVIS SAYS
>> Reporter: ANTONIO TRAVIS SAYS
FIVE DAY SUSPENSIONS FOR MINOR
INFRACTIONS WERE THE NORM AT HIS
INFRACTIONS WERE THE NORM
AT HIS CHARTER SCHOOL.
CHARTER SCHOOL. >>
Reporter: DID YOU SEE
>> Reporter: DID YOU SEE
STUDENTS IN YOUR CLASS START TO
STUDENTS IN YOUR CLASS
START TO DISAPPEAR?
DISAPPEAR? >> YEAH,
MOST DEFINITELY.
>> YEAH, MOST DEFINITELY.
FROM NUROUSME AMOUNTS OF
SUSPENSIONS, PARENTS WOULD JUST
GET TIRED OF IT AND TAKE THEM
GET TIRED OF IT AND TAKE
THEM OUT OF SCHOOL.
OUT OF SCHOOL. >> Reporter:
JUST TWO YEARS AGO,
>> Reporter: JUST TWO YEARS AGO,
SOME CHARTERS WERE SUSPENDING
40% OR MORE OF THEIR STUDENTS.
>> THEY WANNA HAVE GREAT TEST
>> THEY WANNA HAVE
GREAT TEST SCORES.
SCORES. IF YOU'RE A
LOW TESTER AND I
IF YOU'RE A LOW TESTER AND I
REALLY WANT TO GET YOU OUT OF MY
SCHOOL, ONE OF THE TOOLS I'VE
SEEN USED IS SUSPENSION.
SEEN USED IS SUSPENSION. >>
Reporter: WHILE SOME CHARGED
>> Reporter: WHILE SOME CHARGED
STUDENTS WERE BEING PUSHED OUT,
OTHERS CLAIMED THAT THEIR KIDS
COULDN'T EVEN GET A FOOT IN THE
COULDN'T EVEN GET A
FOOT IN THE DOOR.
DOOR. >> THE 1ST
TIME WE WENT AND
>> THE 1ST TIME WE WENT AND
APPLIED AT A CHARTER AFTER
KATRINA, WHAT I HEARD WAS:
"OH, WE CAN'T, WE CAN'T
ACCOMMODATE HIM."
ACCOMMODATE HIM." >> Reporter:
SUE BORDELON'S SON,
>> Reporter: SUE BORDELON'S
SON, CLARKE, HAS AUTISM.
CLARKE, HAS AUTISM. >> AND
THIS WAS REPEATED OVER
>> AND THIS WAS REPEATED OVER
AND OVER AT EVERY CHARTER SCHOOL
AND OVER AT EVERY CHARTER
SCHOOL WE WENT TO.
WE WENT TO. >> Reporter:
PARENTS OF STUDENTS
>> Reporter: PARENTS OF STUDENTS
WITH DISABILITIES TOOK THEIR
CLAIMS TO COURT AND WON STRICTER
OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION.
OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION. BUT
EVEN BEFORE THE LAWSUIT,
BUT EVEN BEFORE THE LAWSUIT,
STATE OFFICIALS HAD BEGUN TO
REASSERT CONTROL OVER CHARTER
SCHOOLS, STARTING WITH A NEW,
SCHOOLS, STARTING WITH A
NEW, CENTRALIZED SYSTEM FOR
CENTRALIZED SYSTEM
FOR ADMISSIONS.
ADMISSIONS. >> WITH OUR
CENTRAL ENROLLMENT
>> WITH OUR CENTRAL ENROLLMENT
SYSTEM, IT'S AGNOSTIC AND
DOESN'T KNOW WHETHER THE KID HAS
DOESN'T KNOW WHETHER THE
KID HAS A DISABILITY.
A DISABILITY. SO SCHOOLS,
ONCE YOU GET A KID
SO SCHOOLS, ONCE YOU GET A KID
IN THE SCHOOL, THE CHILD IS
ASSIGNED TO THE SCHOOL, YOU HAVE
ASSIGNED TO THE SCHOOL, YOU
HAVE TO SERVE THAT KID.
TO SERVE THAT KID. >>
Reporter: THE APPROACH TO
>> Reporter: THE APPROACH TO
DISCIPLINE IS ALSO CHANGING.
ANY EXPULSIONS MUST NOW BE
ANY EXPULSIONS MUST NOW
BE APPROVED BY THE STATE.
APPROVED BY THE STATE. BUT
WHAT ABOUT SUSPENSIONS?
BUT WHAT ABOUT SUSPENSIONS? >>
THEY CAN SUSPEND AS MUCH AS
>> THEY CAN SUSPEND
AS MUCH AS THEY WANT.
THEY WANT. AND IF
YOU'RE 14 OR 15, 16 AND
AND IF YOU'RE 14 OR 15, 16 AND
YOU'RE ON SUSPENSION EVERY TWO
WEEKS, EVERY TWO WEEKS, AFTER
AWHILE YOU'RE NOT GOING TO COME
AWHILE YOU'RE NOT GOING
TO COME BACK TO SCHOOL.
BACK TO SCHOOL. >> Reporter:
CHARTERS POINT TO
>> Reporter: CHARTERS POINT TO
DECLINING SUSPENSION RATES AS
EVIDENCE THEY'RE NOT PUSHING
EVIDENCE THEY'RE NOT
PUSHING STUDENTS OUT.
STUDENTS OUT. TO KEEP
KIDS AT SCHOOL AND
TO KEEP KIDS AT SCHOOL AND
ADDRESS BEHAVIOR, SOME ARE
BRINGING IN MORE COUNSELORS.
IT'S A START, BUT THERE'S HARD
IT'S A START, BUT THERE'S
HARD WORK AHEAD.
WORK AHEAD. >> I THINK
THE NEXT 10 TO 15
>> I THINK THE NEXT 10 TO 15
YEARS IS LITERALLY AROUND MENTAL
HEALTH INTERVENTIONS THAT WE
HEALTH INTERVENTIONS THAT
WE COULD PUT IN PLACE.
COULD PUT IN PLACE. LIKE DO
WE NEED MORE THAN SCHOOL
LIKE DO WE NEED MORE THAN
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS?
PSYCHOLOGISTS? MAYBE
WE NEED PSYCHIATRISTS.
MAYBE WE NEED PSYCHIATRISTS.
THOSE ARE THE THINGS THAT
TRADITIONALLY HAVEN'T BEEN LIKE
THE MAIN FOCUS OF SCHOOLS, BUT
THE MAIN FOCUS OF SCHOOLS,
BUT WE HAVE TO LOOK AT THAT.
WE HAVE TO LOOK AT THAT. >>
Reporter: THE DIFFICULT WORK
>> Reporter: THE DIFFICULT WORK
OF SCHOOL REFORM HAS ALSO MADE
OF SCHOOL REFORM HAS ALSO
MADE NEW ORLEANS LOOK WITHIN.
NEW ORLEANS LOOK WITHIN.
>> WE HAVE TO HAVE LIKE A
FEDERALIST TYPE OF OVERSIGHT.
GOVERNMENT HAS TO PLAY A ROLE
AND MAKE SURE THAT ALL STUDENTS
ARE BEING SERVED WELL.
ARE BEING SERVED WELL. BUT
THEN WITHIN THAT FRAMEWORK
BUT THEN WITHIN THAT FRAMEWORK
WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO GIVE LIKE
INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS TO CHARTERS,
MUCH LIKE STATES RIGHTS.
THAT'S IN ESSENCE WHAT WE'RE
THAT'S IN ESSENCE
WHAT WE'RE BUILDING.
BUILDING. >> Reporter:
WHETHER CHARTERS
>> Reporter: WHETHER CHARTERS
SCHOOLS CAN DELIVER ON THEIR
PROMISE TO PROVIDE QUALITY
EDUCATION TO ALL STUDENTS HERE
EDUCATION TO ALL STUDENTS
HERE REMAINS TO BE SEEN.
REMAINS TO BE SEEN. IN NEW
ORLEANS, I'M JOHN TULENKO
IN NEW ORLEANS, I'M JOHN TULENKO
OF EDUCATION WEEK, REPORTING FOR
OF EDUCATION WEEK, REPORTING
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US.
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR: MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS ANALYZE
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ANALYZE THE WEEK'S NEWS.
THE WEEK'S NEWS. ANHOW
D A CONGREGATION CAME
ANHOW D A CONGREGATION CAME
TOGETHER IN A PREACHER'S LIVING
ROOM AFTER THEIR NEW ORLEANS
CHURCH WAS DESTROYED.
BUT FIRST, WE RETURN TO
QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS BEING
RAISED ABOUT SEXUAL ASSAULT
AMONG TEENS AT THE HIGH SCHOOL
AND COLLEGE LEVEL AND WHAT KIND
OF CONSENT CAN AND SHOULD GIVEN.
A TRIAL OVER AN ALLEGED CASE OF
RAPE AT AN ELITE BOARDING SCHOOL
IN NEW HAMPSHIRE CONCLUDED
IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
CONCLUDED TODAY.
TODAY. THE CASE HAS
ATTRACTED NATIONAL
THE CASE HAS ATTRACTED NATIONAL
ATTENTION, AND IT TOUCHES ON
ATTENTION, AND IT TOUCHES
ON SOME BROADER ISSUES
SOME BROADER ISSUES JEFFREY
BROWN STARTS WITH SOME
JEFFREY BROWN STARTS
WITH SOME BACKGROUND.
BACKGROUND. >> Brown:
OWEN LABRIE WEPT AS
>> Brown: OWEN LABRIE WEPT AS
HIS VERDICT WAS READ ALOUD IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE COURTROOM.
THE FORMER PREP SCHOOL STUDENT
HAD BN ACEECUSED OF RAPING A
HAD BN ACEECUSED OF RAPING
A FRESHMAN GIRL BEFORE HIS
FRESHMAN GIRL BEFORE HIS
GRADUATION IN MAY 2014.
GRADUATION IN MAY 2014. BUT
THE JURY THIS AFTERNOON
BUT THE JURY THIS AFTERNOON
CLEARED HIM OF FELONY RAPE AND,
INSTEAD, CONVICTED HIM ON THREE
MISDEMEANOR SEX CHARGES.
DURING THE TRIAL, PROSECUTORS
ARGUED LABRIE FORCED HIMSELF ON
THE ALLEGED VICTIM DURING A SO-
CALLED "SENIOR SALUTE"-- A
TRADITION AT ST. PAUL'S SCHOOL
WHERE UPPERCLASSMEN TRY TO HAVE
WHERE UPPERCLASSMEN TRY TO
HAVE SEX WITH UNDERCLASSMEN.
SEX WITH UNDERCLASSMEN. >>
I THOUGHT SHE WAS HAVING A
>> I THOUGHT SHE WAS
HAVING A GOOD TIME.
GOOD TIME. >> Brown:
LABRIE SAID THERE WAS
>> Brown: LABRIE SAID THERE
WAS CONSENSUAL SEXUAL CONTACT
CONSENSUAL SEXUAL CONTACT
BETWEEN THE TWO, BUT LATER
TESTIFIED THAT "DIVINE
INSPIRATION" COMPELLED HIM TO
STOP SHORT OF INTERCOURSE.
STOP SHORT OF INTERCOURSE. >>
I THOUGHT TO MYSELF MAYBE WE
>> I THOUGHT TO MYSELF MAYBE
WE SHOULDN'T DO THIS.
SHOULDN'T DO THIS. IT
HADN'T BEEN MY INTENTION
IT HADN'T BEEN MY INTENTION
GOING INTO THE NIGHT TO HAVE
GOING INTO THE
NIGHT TO HAVE SEX.
SEX. >> Brown: THE
IDENTITY OF THE
>> Brown: THE IDENTITY OF THE
VICTIM-- NOW 16 YEARS OLD-- HAS
VICTIM-- NOW 16 YEARS OLD--
HAS NOT BEEN RELEASED.
NOT BEEN RELEASED. IN HER
TESTIMONY SHE SAID SHE
IN HER TESTIMONY SHE SAID SHE
SAID "NO" ON THREE OCCASIONS.
PROSECUTOR JOSEPH CHERNESKIE:
>> HE DIDN'T CARE THAT SHE SAID
NO OR FROZE UP, HE CARED ABOUT
NO OR FROZE UP, HE CARED
ABOUT WHAT HE WANTED.
WHAT HE WANTED. >> Brown:
THE DEFENSE COUNTERS
>> Brown: THE DEFENSE COUNTERS
THE VICTIM LIED ABOUT THE
ENCOUNTER TO PROTECT HERSELF,
ONLY AFTER LABRIE BRAGGED ABOUT
ONLY AFTER LABRIE BRAGGED
ABOUT HAVING SEX ON FACEBOOK.
HAVING SEX ON FACEBOOK. IT'S
A CLAIM LABRIE NOW SAYS WAS
IT'S A CLAIM LABRIE
NOW SAYS WAS FALSE.
FALSE. >> IT WAS A
JOKE, BUT TODAY'S A
>> IT WAS A JOKE, BUT
TODAY'S A LIE RIGHT?
LIE RIGHT? >> YES IT
IS A LIE I WANTED TO
>> YES IT IS A LIE I WANTED TO
BOAST TO MY FRIENDS AFTERWARDS.
AND I MISLED THEM.
HE FACES ONE YEAR IN PRISON FOR
EACH OF THE MISDEMEANOR CHARGES
AND UP TO SEVEN FOR THE FELONY
EVERY CASE COMES WITH ITS OWN
EVERY CASE COMES WITH ITS
OWN PARTICULARS, OF COURSE.
PARTICULARS, OF COURSE. THIS
ONE HAD THE ADDED PUBLIC
THIS ONE HAD THE ADDED PUBLIC
ATTENTION BECAUSE OF ITS SETTING
AT AN ELITE PREP SCHOOL.
AT AN ELITE PREP SCHOOL. BUT
IT DOES, SAY OUR TWO GUESTS,
BUT IT DOES, SAY OUR TWO GUESTS,
SPEAK TO DIFFICULT LARGER
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE LAW AND WHAT
CONSTITUTES SEXUAL CONSENT.
TURN TO: EMILY BAZELON IS A
STAFF WRITER FOR "THE NEW YORK
TIMES" MAGAZINE WHO HAS BEEN
TIMES" MAGAZINE WHO HAS
BEEN REPORTING ON THE CASE.
REPORTING ON THE CASE. SHE
IS ALSO A SENIOR RESEARCH
SHE IS ALSO A SENIOR RESEARCH
FELLOW AT YALE LAW SCHOOL.
AND DEBORAH TUERKHEIMER IS
PROFESSOR OF LAW AT NORTHWESTERN
UNIVERSITY WHO HAS WRITTEN
WIDELY ON RAPE AND DOMESTIC
WIDELY ON RAPE AND
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
VIOLENCE. WELCOME
TO BOTH OF YOU.
WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU. EMILY
BAZELON, WE START WITH
EMILY BAZELON, WE
START WITH YOU.
YOU. YOU HAVE
FOLLOWED THIS CASE.
YOU HAVE FOLLOWED THIS CASE.
WHAT CAN YOU READ FROM TODAY'S
WHAT CAN YOU READ
FROM TODAY'S VERDICT?
VERDICT? WHAT CAN
YOU SEE FROM IT?
WHAT CAN YOU SEE FROM IT?
>> IT'S A NUANCED, MIXED
>> IT'S A NUANCED,
MIXED VERDICT.
VERDICT. I THINK YOU
CAN SEE THE JURY
I THINK YOU CAN SEE THE JURY
BELIEVES OWEN HAD SEX WITH THE
GIRL WHO ACCUSED HIM OF RAPE AND
WERE CONVINCED THAT BECAUSE SHE
WAS YOUNGER -- SHE WAS 15 AT THE
TIME, HE WAS 18 -- THAT THIS WAS
TIME, HE WAS 18 -- THAT THIS
WAS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
A CRIMINAL OFFENSE. BUT THE
JURY DID NOT SEE ENOUGH
BUT THE JURY DID NOT SEE ENOUGH
EVIDENCE TO BE CERTAIN THAT THIS
GIRL DID NOT FREELY CONSENT TO
THE SEX AND, SO, FOR THAT REASON
FOUND OWEN NOT GUILTY OF THE
FOUND OWEN NOT GUILTY
OF THE FELONY CHARGE.
FELONY CHARGE. >>
Brown: TO CHAFER, THE
>> Brown: TO CHAFER, THE
MISDEMEANOR CONVICTION IS
BECAUSE UNDER THE LAW A
15-YEAR-OLD REALLY CANNOT GIVE
15-YEAR-OLD REALLY
CANNOT GIVE CONSENT?
CONSENT? >> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT. THE JURY
COULD SAY WHETHER OR
THE JURY COULD SAY WHETHER OR
NOT SHE CONSENTED, THIS IS A
MISDEMEANOR OFFENSE BECAUSE OF
THE AGE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
THE AGE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE TWO OF THEM.
TWO OF THEM. >> Brown:
DEBORAH TUERKHEIMER,
>> Brown: DEBORAH TUERKHEIMER,
WHAT DO YOU SEE IN THE VERDICT?
AND TELL US WHAT KIND OF ISSUES
IT BEGINS TO RAISE IN THE LARGER
IT BEGINS TO RAISE IN
THE LARGER QUESTION.
QUESTION. >> WELL,
THESE ARE INCREDIBLY
>> WELL, THESE ARE
INCREDIBLY DIFFICULT CASES.
DIFFICULT CASES. AS YOU
MENTIONED, JEFFREY, EACH
AS YOU MENTIONED, JEFFREY, EACH
IS DIFFERENT AND THEY'RE ALL
IS DIFFERENT AND THEY'RE
ALL VERY FACTPECI SFIC.
VERY FACTPECI SFIC. BUT
CASES LIKE THIS TEND TO
BUT CASES LIKE THIS TEND TO
INVOLVE TWO DIFFERENT VERSIONS
OF THE EVENTS AND THE JURY IS
FORCED TO GRAPPLE WITH DIFFICULT
QUESTIONS OF CREDIBILITY.
QUESTIONS OF CREDIBILITY. THAT
SURELY WAS THE CASE HERE.
THAT SURELY WAS THE CASE HERE.
IT SEEMS, AS EMILY SAYS, THAT
THE JURY DID NOT BELIEVE OWEN'S
ACCOUNT, THAT THERE WAS NO SEX.
AT THE SAME TIME, IT WAS, I
THINK, INCREDIBLY DIFFICULT TO
THINK, INCREDIBLY DIFFICULT
TO SORT OUT THIS QUESTION OF
SORT OUT THIS QUESTION OF
CONSNTE AND WHETHER THE SIGNALS
WERE CLEAR ENOUGH, WHETHER THE
NOS AND THE CONTEXT OF WHAT CAME
BEFORE AND AFTER WERE CLEAR
BEFORE AND AFTER
WERE CLEAR ENOUGH.
ENOUGH. SO, FOR
ME, WHAT'S REALLY
SO, FOR ME, WHAT'S REALLY
INTERESTING ABOUT THIS TRIAL AND
THIS CASE IS THAT IT'S CENTERED
ON QUESTIONS OF CONSENT,
NOTWITHSTANDING THE MISDEMEANOR
CHARGES, AT THE HEART OF THIS
CASE WAS THE ISSUE OF CONSENT,
WHICH IS WHERE RAPE LAW IS
MOVING TOWARD, IN THIS DIRECTION
OF LOOKING AT CONSENT AS THE
OF LOOKING AT CONSENT
AS THE CENTRAL ISSUE.
CENTRAL ISSUE. >>
Brown: EMILY BAZELON,
>> Brown: EMILY BAZELON,
EXPLAIN TO US THE STATE OF
WHAT'S UNDERSTOOD AND WHAT'S
STILL CONFUSING ABOUT CONSENT.
WE ALL KNOW THE PHRASE "NO MEANS
NO," WE HEAR MORE ABOUT AN
NO," WE HEAR MORE ABOUT
AN AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT.
AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT. WE STILL
HEAR ABOUT THE POSSIBLE
WE STILL HEAR ABOUT THE POSSIBLE
ROLE OF FORCE IN THESE CASES.
WHAT CAN WE SEE WE KNOW AT THIS
WHAT CAN WE SEE WE KNOW AT
THIS POINT AND WHAT'S STILL
POINT AND WHAT'S
STILL CONFUSING?
CONFUSING? >> IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE IT COUNTS AS
>> IN NEW HAMPSHIRE IT COUNTS AS
RAPE TO HAVE SEX WITH SOMEONE
WHO DOES NOT FREELY CONSENT AND
THAT WAS AT ISSUE IN THIS TRIAL,
AS DEBORAH WAS MAKING CLEAR.
IN MANY STATES, HOWEVER, THE
PROSECUTION HAS AN ADDITIONAL
BURP AND HAS TO SHOW FORCE WAS
BURP AND HAS TO SHOW FORCE
WAS USED IN THE SEXUAL ACT.
USED IN THE SEXUAL ACT.
WHETHER THAT IS STILL THE
APPROPRIATE LEGAL STANDARD IN
THIS TIME WHERE WE REALLY HAVE
FOCUSED ON CONSENT I THINK IS AN
FOCUSED ON CONSENT I THINK
IS AN OPEN QUESTION.
OPEN QUESTION. THESE
STATUTES TO ME SEEM QUITE
THESE STATUTES TO ME
SEEM QUITE OUTDATED.
OUTDATED. WHAT YOU CAN
SEE IN THIS CASE,
WHAT YOU CAN SEE IN THIS CASE,
HOWEVER, WHERE CONSENT WAS AT
ISSUE IS HOW DIFFICULT IT IS TO
KNOW WHAT HAPPENED BETWEEN TWO
PEOPLE IN THE PRIVATE SPACE
WHERE NO ONE ELSE WAS THERE.
>> Brown: BUT, DEBORAH
TUERKHEIMER, THAT MEANS IN
DIFFERENT STATES YOU CAN GET
VERY DIFFERENT RESULTS, EVEN
WHEN THE FACTS ARE CLEAR OR
WHEN THE FACTS ARE
CLEAR OR UNDERSTOOD.
UNDERSTOOD. >> RIGHT,
AND IN MANY STATES
>> RIGHT, AND IN MANY STATES
THIS CASE WOULD NEVER HAVE COME
THIS CASE WOULD NEVER
HAVE COME TO A TRIAL.
TO A TRIAL. NO PROS
TUTOR WOULD BE ABLE TO
NO PROS TUTOR WOULD BE ABLE TO
MOVE IT FORWARD, EXCEPT, AGAIN,
ON THE MISDEMEANOR CHARGES.
THAT IN ITSELF IS WORTH TALKING
THAT IN ITSELF IS
WORTH TALKING ABOUT.
ABOUT. IS THIS THE
KIND OF CASE THAT WE
IS THIS THE KIND OF CASE THAT WE
WANT TO SEE GO FORWARD AND AT
WANT TO SEE GO FORWARD AND
AT LEAST PUT IT TO A JURY TO
LEAST PUT IT TO A JURY TO
RESOLVE THESE QUESTIONS OF
RESOLVE THESE QUESTIONS
OF CREDIBILITY.
CREDIBILITY. >> Brown:
WHAT ABOUT, DEBORAH
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT, DEBORAH
TUERKHEIMER, THE ISSUE OF
AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT WHERE A
"YES" IS REQUIRED AS OPPOSED TO
"YES" IS REQUIRED AS OPPOSED
TO A "NO MEANS NO."
A "NO MEANS NO." HOW MUCH
HAS THAT STANDARD COME
HOW MUCH HAS THAT STANDARD COME
TO BE ACCEPTED AT THIS POINT?
>> WELL, THE STANDARD IS IT
INCREASINGLY ACCEPTED ON COLLEGE
CAMPUSES WHERE THE YES MEANS
YES, AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT
MOVEMENT HAS HAD CONSIDERABLE
MOVEMENT HAS HAD
CONSIDERABLE ATTRACTION.
ATTRACTION. 1400 SCHOOLS,
MAYBE MORE AT THIS
1400 SCHOOLS, MAYBE MORE AT THIS
POINT, HAVE ADOPTED THIS KIND OF
STANDARD IN THEIR DISCIPLINARY
CODES, WHICH IS, OF COURSE,
QUITE DIFFERENT FROM A CRIMINAL
CODE WHERE WE'VE REALLY NOT SEEN
THIS KIND OF MOVEMENT IN THE
THIS KIND OF MOVEMENT IN
THE DIRECTION OF REQUIRING
DIRECTION OF REQUIRING
AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT, THE KIND OF
YES MEANS YES, PASSIVITY DOESN'T
MEAN CONSENT, THE ALLEGED VICTIM
MUST DO SOMETHING TO INDICATE
THAT SHE IS WILLING TO ENGAGE IN
THAT SHE IS WILLING TO ENGAGE
IN THIS KIND OF CONDUCT.
THIS KIND OF CONDUCT. THERE
ARE ONLY A VERY SMALL
THERE ARE ONLY A VERY SMALL
NUMBER OF JURISDICTIONS ACTUALLY
HAVE THIS KIND OF DEFINITION ON
HAVE THIS KIND OF
DEFINITION ON THE BOOKS.
THE BOOKS. >> Brown:
BUT EMILY BAZELON,
>> Brown: BUT EMILY BAZELON,
IT IS A MOMENT WHERE A LOT OF
STUDENTS ARE STARTING COLLEGE OR
STUDENTS ARE STARTING COLLEGE
OR GOING BACK TO SCHOOL.
GOING BACK TO SCHOOL. HOW
MUCH DO YOU SENSE AN
HOW MUCH DO YOU SENSE AN
AWARENESS OF THIS ON COLLEGE CAM
AWARENESS OF THIS ON
COLLEGE CAM PULSES?
PULSES? WHAT'S -- CAMPUSES?
WHAT'S -- CAMPUSES? WHAT'S
BEING DONE FOR MORE
WHAT'S BEING DONE FOR MORE
AWARENESS OR MORE PREVENTION AT
AWARENESS OR MORE
PREVENTION AT THIS POINT?
THIS POINT? >> SOME
SCHOOLS ARE REALLY
>> SOME SCHOOLS ARE REALLY
TRYING TO TEACH STUDENTS ABOUT
YES MEANS YES AND NO MEANS NO TO
GET THEM TO FOCUS ON THIS IDEA
THAT IF YOU'RE ENGAGING IN
SEXUAL ACTIVITY WITH SOMEONE,
YOU MAKE SURE THAT BOTH PEOPLE
WANT TO BE DOING WHAT YOU'RE
WANT TO BE DOING
WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
DOING. I THINK CASES
LIKE THIS HELP
I THINK CASES LIKE THIS HELP
DRIVE HOME THE MESSAGE THAT
THERE IS RISK HERE FOR BOYS AND
MEN AS WELL AS GIRLS AND WOMEN,
A REASON TO LOOK OUT FOR
YOURSELF, A POSSIBILITY OF A
YOURSELF, A POSSIBILITY OF
A PROSECUTION LIKE THIS.
PROSECUTION LIKE THIS. SO
THAT'S SOMETHING HOPEFULLY
SO THAT'S SOMETHING HOPEFULLY
STUDENTS WILL TAKE TO HEART.
>> Brown: WE'RE TAKING ABOUT
>> Brown: WE'RE
TAKING ABOUT COLLEGE.
COLLEGE. BUT DEBORAH
TUERKHEIMER, IN THE
BUT DEBORAH TUERKHEIMER, IN THE
CASE LIKE TODAY, WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HIGH SCHOOL, IT'S A PREP
SCHOOL, SO MAYBE A SPECIALIZED
SCHOOL, SO MAYBE A
SPECIALIZED KIND OF CASE.
KIND OF CASE. BUT HOW
MUCH OF ALL WE'RE
BUT HOW MUCH OF ALL WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT, THE AWARENESS AT
THE COLLEGE LEVEL, FOR EXAMPLE,
DO YOU HAVE ANY SENSE OF HOW
MUCH THAT IS FILTERED TO HIGH
SCHOOLS, ADMINISTRATORS, PEOPLE
IN CHARGE THAT ARE MAYBE MAKING
IN CHARGE THAT ARE MAYBE
MAKING STUDENTS AWARE OF IT?
STUDENTS AWARE OF IT?
>> MY SENSE IS THAT THE
CONVERSAON ITIS AT AN EARLIER
STAGE OF ITS EVOLUTION, WHEN IT
STAGE OF ITS EVOLUTION, WHEN
IT COMES TO THIS ISSUE ON HIGH
COMES TO THIS ISSUE ON HIGH
SCHOOL CAMPUSES AS OPPOSED TO
SCHOOL CAMPUSES AS OPPOSED
TO COLLEGE CAMPUSES.
COLLEGE CAMPUSES. BUT
IT'S, OF COURSE, REALLY
BUT IT'S, OF COURSE, REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THIS, AND THE YOUNGER --
THE POPULATION, I THINK, THE
GREATER LIKELIHOOD THESE KINDS
OF CASES ARE GOING TO COME TO
THE FORE IF WE'RE OPEN TO SEEING
THE FORE IF WE'RE
OPEN TO SEEING THEM.
THEM. >> Brown: ONE BRIEF LAST
>> Brown: ONE BRIEF LAST
QUESTION, EMILY BAZELON, IS THAT
THE AREA WHERE THE LAW FOLLOWS
THE CULTURE WHEN YOU SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING AROUND DIFFERENT
STATES OR EVEN IN A NATIONAL
STATES OR EVEN IN
A NATIONAL LEVEL?
LEVEL? WHAT LEADS
THE CONVERSATION OR
WHAT LEADS THE CONVERSATION
OR THE ACTION?
THE ACTION? >> YOU KNOW,
THAT'S SCUTC SUCH D
>> YOU KNOW, THAT'S
SCUTC SUCH D QUESTION.
QUESTION. THEY TEND
TO TAKE TURNS OR MOVE
THEY TEND TO TAKE TURNS OR MOVE
IN TANDEM WITH EACH OTHER.
IN TANDEM WITH EACH OTHER. RIGHT
NOW I THINK THE CU LAW INE
RIGHT NOW I THINK THE CU LAW INE
THAT THE CULTURE IS VERY MUCH
ABOUT THIS QUESTION OF CONSENT,
AND LEGAL STATUTES CAN TAKE TIME
TO REWRITE AND BE REENACTED.
SO WE HAVE A NUMBER OF STATES
THAT HAVE LAGGED BEHIND THE
CULTURAL CONVERSATION AND IT'S
TIME FOR THE LAW TO CATCH UP.
>> Brown: THANK YOU VERY MUCH,
EMILY BAZELON AND DEBORAH
EMILY BAZELON AND
DEBORAH TUERKHEIMER.
TUERKHEIMER. >> THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU. S FOR HAVING US.
>> Woodruff: VICE PRESIDENT JOE
BIDEN WEIGHS A RUN FOR THE WHITE
HOUSE, PARTY LOYALISTS CRITICIZE
HILLARY CLINTON'S HANDLING OF
HER PERSONAL EMAIL ACCOUNT AND
BERNIE SANDERS CONTINUES TO DRAW
HUGE CROWDS AND PULLS AHEAD IN
HUGE CROWDS AND PULLS
AHEAD IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.
NEW HAMPSHIRE. JUST A
FEW OF THIS WEEK'S NEWS
JUST A FEW OF THIS WEEK'S NEWS
DEVELOPMENTS, AS WE TURN TO THE
ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
WELCOME, GENTLEMEN.
WELCOME, GENTLEMEN. WE HAVE
BEEN SPENDING A LOT OF
WE HAVE BEEN SPENDING A LOT
OF TIME TALKING ABOUT THE
TIME TALKING ABOUT THE
REPUBLICAN IN THE LAST FEW
REPUBLICAN IN THE
LAST FEW WEEKS.
WEEKS. LET'S SPEND
TIME TALKING ABOUT
LET'S SPEND TIME TALKING
ABOUT THE DEMOCRATS.
THE DEMOCRATS. JOE BIDEN,
DAVID, A LOT OF TALK
JOE BIDEN, DAVID, A LOT OF TALK
ABOUT WHETHER HE'S GOING TO GET
IN, HE'S BEEN MEETING WITH THE
HEAD OF THE TEAMSTERS UNION, MET
WITH THE DARLING SENATOR WARREN.
HE'S GOT PEOPLE ADVOCATING FOR
HIM NOW AT THIS BIG DEMOCRATIC
GATHERING IN MINNEAPOLIS.
GATHERING IN MINNEAPOLIS. DO
YOU THINK HE'S GOING THE GET
DO YOU THINK HE'S
GOING THE GET IN?
IN? >> NO.
>> NO. FIRST, GOD
BLESS HIM FOR HIS
FIRST, GOD BLESS HIM
FOR HIS RESILIENCE.
RESILIENCE. THE GUY
STILL LOSES HIS SON,
THE GUY STILL LOSES HIS SON,
STILL WANTS TO SERVE THE COUNTRY
AND IS EMOTIONALLY STRONG ENOUGH
TO DO IT AND I SALUTE HIM.
HE'S A WONDERFUL MAN, A GREAT
HE'S A WONDERFUL MAN, A
GREAT PUBLIC SERVANT.
PUBLIC SERVANT. WHAT THE
COUNTRY IS IN THE MOOD
WHAT THE COUNTRY IS IN THE MOOD
FOR IS ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT.
THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS
HILLARY CLINTON AND JEB BUSH IS
HILLARY CLINTON AND JEB BUSH
IS SAILING INTO HEAD WINDS.
SAILING INTO HEAD WINDS.
WHATEVER IS HAPPENING WITH THE
CLINTON CAMPAIGN, JOE HAS THE
CLINTON CAMPAIGN, JOE
HAS THE PROBLEM.
PROBLEM. HE'LL GET
A SENSE OF THE
HE'LL GET A SENSE OF THE
ATMOSPHERE, THE MONEY AND THE
ORGANIZATION, AND HILLARY
CLINTON IS STILL A FORMIDABLE
CLINTON IS STILL A
FORMIDABLE OPPONENT.
OPPONENT. MY GUESS
IS HE WON'T DO IT.
MY GUESS IS HE WON'T DO IT.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU SHARE THE
>> Woodruff: DO YOU
SHARE THE GUESS?
GUESS? >> I DON'T.
>> I DON'T. YOU KNOW,
WITH GREAT RESPECT FOR
YOU KNOW, WITH GREAT RESPECT FOR
DAVID, I DON'T THINK ANYBODY
DAVID, I DON'T THINK
ANYBODY KNOWS.
KNOWS. ASAVI DD
INDICATED, HE WAS NOT
ASAVI DD INDICATED,
HE WAS NOT SURE.
SURE. IT'S A MOST
PERSONAL DECISION
IT'S A MOST PERSONAL DECISION
IMAGINABLE, AS DAVID TOUCHED ON,
WITH THE DEATH OF HIS SON IN
MAY, IT BECOMES MORE PERSONAL.
IT'S A FAMILY DECISION.
HE'S A GRANDFATHER.
HE'S A GRANDFATHER. WHAT
YOU SEE WITH JOE BIDEN IS
WHAT YOU SEE WITH JOE
BIDEN IS WHAT YOU GET.
WHAT YOU GET. DAVID'S
RIGHT, IT IS NOT AN
DAVID'S RIGHT, IT IS NOT AN
ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT BURKS AMERICA
IS CRAVING AUTHENTICITY IN 2016
IS CRAVING AUTHENTICITY IN
2016 AND JOE BIDEN BRINGS
AND JOE BIDEN BRINGS
AUTHENTICITY TO IT.
AUTHENTICITY TO IT. HE'S
ALSO A HAPPY WARRIOR.
HE'S ALSO A HAPPY WARRIOR.
HE ALSO COMMUNICATES WITH
WORKING CLASS VOTERS A LOT
BETTER THAN MOST DEMOCRATS DO,
BETTER THAN MOST DEMOCRATS
DO, AND I THINK BETTER THAN
AND I THINK BETTER THAN
SECRETARY CLINTON DID, EXCEPT IN
SECRETARY CLINTON DID, EXCEPT
IN THE LATE PRIMARIES IN 2008.
THE LATE PRIMARIES
IN 2008. SO RULED
SO RULED IT OUT, HE
ACCEPTED IT EARLIER,
IT OUT, HE ACCEPTED IT EARLIER,
AND HILLARY CLINTON HAD WRAPPED
AND HILLARY CLINTON HAD
WRAPPED UP ENDORSEMENTS.
UP ENDORSEMENTS. SHE HAD
MONEY, SUPPORT, AND SHE
SHE HAD MONEY, SUPPORT,
AND SHE STUMBLED.
STUMBLED. MAKE NO
MISTAKE ABOUT IT.
MAKE NO MISTAKE ABOUT IT. SHE
LOOKS VULNERABLE AND THERE'S
SHE LOOKS VULNERABLE AND THERE'S
A SURGE OF AFFECTION FOR JOE
BIDEN, AND I DON'T THINK HE'S
BIDEN, AND I DON'T THINK
HE'S MADE THE DECISION.
MADE THE DECISION. I THINK
HE'S GOING TO MAKE IT
I THINK HE'S GOING
TO MAKE IT SHORTLY.
SHORTLY. HIS CONVERSATION
WITH ELIZABETH
HIS CONVERSATION WITH ELIZABETH
WARREN WAS NO OFFER, NO ASK.
THEY SPENT AN HOUR AND 50
MINUTES TOGETHER AND MOST WAS
TALKING ABOUT ISSUES AND 10
MINUTES OR SO ABOUT POLITICS.
>> Woodruff: IF HE DID DECIDE
TO GET IN, WHAT WOULD BE THE
TO GET IN, WHAT
WOULD BE THE PROS?
PROS? WHAT WOULD WORK
FOR HIM AND WHAT
WHAT WOULD WORK FOR HIM AND
WHAT WOULD BE THE PROBLEM?
WOULD BE THE PROBLEM?
>> HE'S FROM SCRANTON.
BEAUTIFUL STORIES TO TELL.
WHEN HIS DAD WAS UNEMPLOYED IN
THE DEPRESSION, GOT A JOB WITH
THE CAR DEALER, AND AT CHRISTMAS
THEY WERE AT A PARTY AND THE
OWNERSHIP OF THE DEERPD AS A
BONUS TO THE WORKERS THREW A
BUNCH OF SILVER DOLLARS ON THE
DANCE FLOOR TO PICK THEM UP AND
JOE BIDEN'S DAD QUIT ON THE SPOT
AND WAS NOT GOING TO BE TREATED
AND WAS NOT GOING TO
BE TREATED THAT WAY.
THAT WAY. THAT WAS
AN AUTHENTIC PART OF
THAT WAS AN AUTHENTIC PART OF
LIFE AND THE SENSE OF DIGNITY HE
LIFE AND THE SENSE OF
DIGNITY HE WAS RAISED.
WAS RAISED. WITH JOE
BIDEN QUOTES THIS ALL
WITH JOE BIDEN QUOTES THIS ALL
THE TIME WHEN HE CAMPAIGNS, HIS
ENTIRE FAMILY CAMPAIGNS, HIS
ENTIRE FAMILY
CAMPAIGNS, HIS SISTER.
SISTER. HE'S BEEN
CHANGED IN THE PAST
HE'S BEEN CHANGED IN
THE PAST EIGHT YEARS.
EIGHT YEARS. HE'S URGING
TO EXPRESS HIMSELF.
HE'S URGING TO EXPRESS HIMSELF.
HE HAS GREAT VITALITY.
HE HAS GREAT VITALITY. AS
A CAMPAIGNER, I REMEMBER
AS A CAMPAIGNER, I REMEMBER
FOLLOWING HIM LAST TIME, HE
WOULD GIVE A REALLY GOOD SPEECH
AND THEN TWO OTHERS WOULD COME.
SO HE'S ALWAYS HAD A HARD TIME
SO HE'S ALWAYS HAD A HARD
TIME CONTROLLING HIS TONGUE.
CONTROLLING HIS TONGUE.
BUT HE'S A LOVEABLE GUY.
BUT HE'S A LOVEABLE GUY. >>
Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SEE?
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SEE?
BASICALLY, SECRETARY CLINTON,
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY HAS EMPATHY
AND THAT IS A SENSE ON THE PART
OF VOTERS THAT THEY CARE ABOUT
OF VOTERS THAT THEY CARE
ABOUT PEOPLE LIKE ME.
PEOPLE LIKE ME. IN 2012,
FOUR PRESIDENTIAL
IN 2012, FOUR PRESIDENTIAL
QUALITIES THAT THE EXIT POLL
ASKED VOTERS ON THE ELECTION
DAY, WHO HAS VISION TO THE
FUTURE, WHO'S A STRONG LEADER,
WHO SHARES YOUR VALUES, MITT
ROMNEY BEAT BARACK OBAMA BY TEN
ROMNEY BEAT BARACK
OBAMA BY TEN POINTS.
POINTS. WHO CARES
ABOUT YOU, 81-18
WHO CARES ABOUT YOU,
81-18 BARACK OBAMA.
BARACK OBAMA. BILL
CLINTON ALWAYS HAD THAT.
BILL CLINTON ALWAYS HAD THAT.
BILL CLINTON, HIS CANDOR,
FORTHRIGHTNESS, BEHAVIOR,
THERE'S ALWAYS A SENSE HE CARES
THERE'S ALWAYS A SENSE HE
CARES ABOUT ORDINARY PEOPLE.
ABOUT ORDINARY PEOPLE.
THERE IS A REAL COMMITMENT
THERE IS A REAL
COMMITMENT THERE.
THERE. SHE IN THIS
LATEST QUINNIPIAC
SHE IN THIS LATEST QUINNIPIAC
NATIONAL POLL YESTERDAY, YOU
NATIONAL POLL
YESTERDAY, YOU KNOW --
KNOW -- >> Woodruff:
HILLARY CLINTON?
>> Woodruff: HILLARY CLINTON?
HILLARY CLINTON, WHO'S AHEAD,
WHO'S BEHIND US THING, THEY
ASKED WHO CARES ABOUT THE NEEDS
ASKED WHO CARES ABOUT THE
NEEDS OF SOMEONE LIKE YOU.
OF SOMEONE LIKE YOU. 46%
AGREE, 51% DISAGREE.
46% AGREE, 51% DISAGREE.
THAT IS A KILLER.
THAT IS A KILLER. JOE
BIDEN HAS A FAR MORE
JOE BIDEN HAS A FAR MORE
POSITIVE RATING AS BERNIE
POSITIVE RATING AS
BERNIE SANDERS.
SANDERS. I MEAN, WITH
HILLARY CLINTON,
I MEAN, WITH HILLARY CLINTON,
THE FIRST WOMAN CANDIDATE AND A
DEMOCRAT WHO WAS HAD THE CHIMPS
DEFENSE FUND AND HEALTHCARE AND
ALL THE REST OF IT, THAT'S A
ALL THE REST OF IT,
THAT'S A REAL PROBLEM.
REAL PROBLEM. I
DON'T CARE HOW MANY
I DON'T CARE HOW MANY
ENDORSEMENTS OR SUPERDELEGATES
YOU'VE GOT, THAT BECOMES A REAL
YOU'VE GOT, THAT BECOMES
A REAL PROBLEM.
PROBLEM. >> Woodruff:
WELL, IT IS HER
>> Woodruff: WELL, IT IS HER
PERCEIVED WEAKNESS THAT, AS YOU
PERCEIVED WEAKNESS THAT, AS
YOU SAID, MARK, THAT IT HAS
SAID, MARK, THAT IT HAS
GENERATED ALL THIS TALK AROUND
BIDEN AND THE CONSIDERATION OF
BIDEN AND THE
CONSIDERATION OF BIDEN.
BIDEN. BUT, DAVID,
HOW VULNERABLE IS
BUT, DAVID, HOW
VULNERABLE IS SHE REALLY?
SHE REALLY? SHE'S OUT
THIS WEEK, SHE'S
SHE'S OUT THIS WEEK, SHE'S
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
DECISIONS SHE MADE ON THE
PERSONAL EMAIL SERVER.
SHE'S TALKING A LITTLE BIT
TOUGHER ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL,
TALKING ABOUT HOW REPUBLICANS
AND TERRORISTS VIEW WOMEN.
IS SHE TURNING THIS AROUND?
I MEAN, HOW DO YOU SEE HER
I MEAN, HOW DO YOU SEE
HER VULNERABILITY?
VULNERABILITY? >> I
THINK SHE'S BOTH AN
>> I THINK SHE'S BOTH AN
EXTREMELY LIKELY NOMINEE AND
EXTREMELY LIKELY NOMINEE
AND ALSO KIND OF WEAK.
ALSO KIND OF WEAK. AND I
JUST DON'T THINK THERE'S A
AND I JUST DON'T THINK THERE'S A
PLAUSIBLE ALTERNATIVE RIGHT NOW,
PLAUSIBLE ALTERNATIVE RIGHT
NOW, SO SHE'S GOING TO BE THE
SO SHE'S GOING TO BE THE
NOMINEE, BUT HER WEAKNESSES HAVE
NOMINEE, BUT HER WEAKNESSES
HAVE BEEN ON DISPLAY.
BEEN ON DISPLAY. THINGS
ARE GOING TO COME OUT.
THINGS ARE GOING TO COME OUT.
THEY HAVE THE SERVERS, THEY'RE
GOING TO APPARENTLY BE ABLE TO
RECAPTURE SOME OF THESE DELETED
E-MAILS AND SOME OF THOSE THINGS
MAY OR MAY NOT COME OUT, BUT
THAT'S SITTING OUT THERE.
SECONDLY, THE ESTABLISHMENT
THING IS A PROBLEM FOR HER.
THIRD, AND I THINK THIS IS THE
MOST SERIOUS ONE IN A WAY, IS
THERE IS SORT OF AN UNCONSCIOUS
BOREDOM ABOUT HER PEOPLE, 30%
DON'T THINK WE'RE HEADED IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION, THERE IS A
DESIRE FOR SOMETHING NEW, AND
HER EVENTS, I HAVEN'T BEEN TO
ONE OF HER EVENTS BURKS READING
THEM, SEEING THEM ON THE TV,
THEY DON'T LOOK EXCITING.
THEY DON'T LOOK LIKE THEY'RE
THEY DON'T LOOK LIKE
THEY'RE PASSIONATE.
PASSIONATE. THEY DON'T
LOOK NEW AND FRESH.
THEY DON'T LOOK NEW AND FRESH.
SO, WHEN YOU HAVE A CAMPAIGN
THAT'S NOT THAT CREATIVE,
APPARENTLY, YOU'VE GOT A PROBLEM
AND ESPECIALLY IN A YEAR LIKE
THIS WHEN BERNIE SANDERS AND
TRUMP AND AT LEAST SOMEONE NEW
AND VIBRANT SEEMS TO CAPTURE
AND VIBRANT SEEMS TO
CAPTURE ATTENTION.
ATTENTION. >> Woodruff:
AND THE POLLS SAY
>> Woodruff: AND THE POLLS SAY
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT HER "NOT BEING
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT HER "NOT
BEING TRUSTWORTHY, HONEST."
TRUSTWORTHY, HONEST." IS
THAT REAL AT THIS STAGE?
IS THAT REAL AT THIS
STAGE? >> IT IS.
>> IT IS. I THOUGHT,
AGAIN, THE IDEA WHERE
I THOUGHT, AGAIN, THE IDEA WHERE
PEOPLE VOLUNTEERED A WORD ABOUT
HER IN THE QUINN PHIIAC POLL,
THAT DOESN'T MEAN ANYTHING
UNLESS YOU NARROW IT TO
DEMOCRATS AND INDEPENDENTS.
REPUBLICAN WILL CITE WHAT THEY
FIND THE MOST, SAME IF YOU
TALKING REPUBLICAN TO DEMOCRAT.
THE EMAIL REMAINS A PROBLEM.
THE EMAIL REMAINS A PROBLEM. THE
OTHER THING THAT'S A PROBLEM
THE OTHER THING THAT'S A PROBLEM
IS -- INEVITABILITY IS NOT A
IS -- INEVITABILITY IS
NOT A CAMPAIGN STRATEGY.
CAMPAIGN STRATEGY. WE'RE
GOING TO WIN BECAUSE
WE'RE GOING TO WIN BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE WITH US -- THAT'S NOT
PEOPLE ARE WITH US
-- THAT'S NOT IT.
IT. THERE ISN'T A
SENSE OF PURPOSE
THERE ISN'T A SENSE OF PURPOSE
OR ENERGY OR MISSION IN THE
OR ENERGY OR MISSION IN
THE CAMPAIGN THUS FAR.
CAMPAIGN THUS FAR. MEERNTION
SHE WAS A VERY -- I
MEERNTION SHE WAS A VERY --
I MEAN, SHE WAS A VERY GOOD
MEAN, SHE WAS A VERY GOOD
CANDIDATE AT THE END OF THE RACE
LAST, IN THE STATE LIKE OHIO,
PENNSYLVANIA AND TEXAS SHE WAS A
LOT BETTER CANDIDATE THAN BARACK
LOT BETTER CANDIDATE
THAN BARACK OBAMA.
OBAMA. CAN I TALK
ABOUT BERNIE SANDERS?
CAN I TALK ABOUT BERNIE SANDERS?
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO
ASK YOU BOTH ABOUT HIM.
BOTH ABOUT HIM. WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT HILLARY
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HILLARY
CLINTON'S PROBLEMS, JOE BIDEN
MAY NOT GET IN, BERNIE SANDERS
IS PULLING AHEAD OF HILLARY
CLINTON IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,
DRAWING BIG CROWDS.
DRAWING BIG CROWDS. IS
HE ANY MORE PLAUSIBLE?
IS HE ANY MORE PLAUSIBLE? >>
I'M A LITTLE MORE HUMBLED, I
>> I'M A LITTLE MORE HUMBLED, I
THOUGHT HE WAS NOT PLAUSIBLE AT
THOUGHT HE WAS NOT
PLAUSIBLE AT ALL.
ALL. SOMETIMES PARTIES ELECT A
SOMETIMES PARTIES ELECT A
CANDIDATE THAT'S UNELECTABLE BUT
CANDIDATE THAT'S UNELECTABLE
BUT NOT THAT UNELECTABLE.
NOT THAT UNELECTABLE. THE
COUNTRY IS JUST NOT THAT FAR
THE COUNTRY IS JUST NOT
THAT FAR LEFT AS HE IS.
LEFT AS HE IS. HIS SUPPORT
IS GROWING, BUT I
HIS SUPPORT IS GROWING, BUT I
DON'T KNOW IF IT'S WIDENING AND
WHETHER IT'S WIDENING OUT OF THE
WHITE UNIVERSITY TOWNS, AND IF
HE CAN DO THAT, THEN YOU BEGIN
TO THINK, WELL, MAYBE MAYBE.
BUT UNTIL HE CAN DO THAT, I
THINK IT'S EXTREMELY UNLIKELY
HE'LL BE THE NOMINEE, BUT HE
WILL CONTINUE -- HE'S WHERE THE
ECONOMIC HEART AND SOUL OF THE
ECONOMIC HEART AND SOUL OF
THE PARTY IS RIGHT NOW AND
PARTY IS RIGHT NOW AND
ESPECIALLY AMONG PROGRESSIVES IN
ESPECIALLY AMONG PROGRESSIVES
IN UNIVERSITO LIKE
UNIVERSITO LIKE SEATTLE,
HE'S RIGHT WHAT THEY
SEATTLE, HE'S RIGHT WHAT THEY
NEED AND HE'S GOT THE OUTSIDER
THING WHICH IS SO BIG THIS YEAR.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU SEE
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU
SEE BERNIE SANDERS?
BERNIE SANDERS? >> I'M
MORE EXPRESSED AND HAVE
>> I'M MORE EXPRESSED
AND HAVE BEEN.
BEEN. BEFORE I BECAME
A PUNDIT, I USED
BEFORE I BECAME A PUNDIT, I USED
TO WORK IN POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS,
THREE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S WHAT YOU
>> Woodruff: THAT'S
WHAT YOU DID?
DID? >> YES, NO
INAUGURAL SPEECHES
>> YES, NO INAUGURAL SPEECHES
BUT THREE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS
AND 38 DIFFERENT STATES, AND I
CAN TELL YOU, GETTING A CROWD IS
CAN TELL YOU, GETTING A
CROWD IS A LOT OF WORK.
A LOT OF WORK. IT'S
A LOT OF WORK.
IT'S A LOT OF WORK. THAT'S
WHY PEOPLE DON'T TRY TO
THAT'S WHY PEOPLE DON'T TRY
TO PUT CROWDS TOGETHER.
PUT CROWDS TOGETHER. I MEAN,
IT REQUIRES -- IF YOU
I MEAN, IT REQUIRES --
IF YOU WAN0, HAVE 750
WAN0, HAVE 750 THERE
BECAUSE THE LAST THING YOU
THERE BECAUSE THE LAST THING YOU
WANT IS A PRESS REPORT THAT
BEGINS SPEAKING TO A HALF EMPTY
HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM, SENATOR
BROOKS OUTLINED HIS PROGRAM.
AND THE SIZE AND INTENSITY AND
ENTHUSIASM OF A CROWD DRIVES
PRESS CRNLG AND OVERCOMES
SKEPTICISM IN THE PRESS AND
SKEPTICISM IN THE PRESS
AND ENLISTS PEOPLE.
ENLISTS PEOPLE. BERNIE
SANDERS HAD 27,500 PEOPLE
BERNIE SANDERS HAD 27,500 PEOPLE
IN A SPORTS ARENA IN LOS ANGELES
IN A SPORTS ARENA IN
LOS ANGELES IN AUGUST.
IN AUGUST. A DEMOCRATIC
CAMPAIGN EVENT IN
A DEMOCRATIC CAMPAIGN EVENT
IN LOS ANGELES IS A PARTY AT
LOS ANGELES IS A PARTY AT
STEPHEN SPEILBERG'S HOUSE HOSTED
STEPHEN SPEILBERG'S HOUSE
HOSTED BY GEORGE CLUNEY.
BY GEORGE CLUNEY. I MEAN,
THEY DON'T GET 27,500
I MEAN, THEY DON'T
GET 27,500 PEOPLE.
PEOPLE. THAT IS REMARKABLE.
THAT IS REMARKABLE.
11,000 IN PHOENIX.
11,000 IN PHOENIX. 28,000
IN PORTLAND ON A SUNDAY.
28,000 IN PORTLAND ON A SUNDAY.
I MEAN, THAT IS REAL INTENSITY.
EVERYTHING ABOUT BERNIE SANDERS,
I THINK, TRANSLATES IN A YEAR
WHEN MONEY IS KING, AND DONALD
TR I GREATEST CAMPAIGN FINANCE
REFORMER, BUT PULLING BACK THE
CURTAIN AND SAYING, THIS IS HOW
IT WORKS, I GIVE MONEY, THE
SENATOR CALLS ME BACK AND SHE
DOES WHAT I WANT HER THE TO DO.
BERNIE SANDERS RAISED AN AVERAGE
CONTRIBUTION, 80% OF HIS MONEY,
CONTRIBUTION, 80%
OF HIS MONEY, $31.
$31. IT'S SMALL DONORS.
IT'S SMALL DONORS. WE IN
THE PRESS ARE NOT BIBLICAL
WE IN THE PRESS ARE NOT BIBLICAL
SCHOLARS BUT WE LOVE THE DAVID
AND GOLIATH STORY AND HE IS
AND GOLIATH STORY
AND HE IS DAVID.
DAVID. IT'S NOT THE MESSENGER.
IT'S NOT THE MESSENGER.
HE'S NOT A CHARISMATIC,
COMPELLING PERSONAL FIGURE.
COMPELLING PERSONAL FIGURE. HE
HAS A COMPELLING MESSAGE AND
HE HAS A COMPELLING MESSAGE
AND THAT, IS YOU KNOW, TO
THAT, IS YOU KNOW, TO WALL
STREET AND THE REST THAT
WALL STREET AND THE REST THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO PAY YOUR FAIR
SHARE AND YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
GET AWAY WITH MURDER ANYMORE.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL LEAVE IT
THERE, MARK SHIELDS, DAVID
BROOKS, THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Woodruff: BEFORE WE GO, WE
FINISH OUT THE WEEK WITH VOICES
FROM A SMALL COMMUNITY CHURCH IN
NEW ORLEANS THAT'S STILL TRYING
TO REBUILD A FULL DECADE LATER.
THE MOUNT NEBO BIBLE BAPTIST
CHURCH WAS DESTROYED IN THE
LOWER NINTH WARD DURING THE
STORM, WHILE NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS WERE FORCED TO MOVE
RESIDENTS WERE
FORCED TO MOVE AWAY.
AWAY. TODAY THEY ARE
RETURNING SLOWLY.
TODAY THEY ARE RETURNING SLOWLY.
BUT THE REVEREND CHARLES
DUPLESSIS STILL HAS TO LEAD
CHURCH SERVICE AND BIBLE STUDY
IN THE LIVING ROOM OF HIS VERY
OWN HOME, AS HE WORKS TO BRING
BACK THE CHURCH BUILDING.
OH LORD, HAVE MERCY.
HAVE MERCY, ON MY SOUL.
>> THE DAY WE ENTERED THE
BUILDING, WE SURROUNDED IT.
WE HAD THE FRIENDS AND FAMILY
AND THE CHURCH MEMBERS.
AND THE CHURCH MEMBERS. WE
SURROUNDED THE CHURCH, WE
WE SURROUNDED THE CHURCH, WE
SAID A PRAYER BEFORE WE EVEN
WENT INTO THE BUILDING.
WENT INTO THE BUILDING. AND
SO WE WENT IN AND WE HAD A
AND SO WE WENT IN AND WE HAD
A JOYFUL NOISE IN THE LORD.
JOYFUL NOISE IN THE LORD.
WE HAD CHOIRS, WE STARTED A
WE HAD CHOIRS, WE
STARTED A YOUTH CHOIR.
YOUTH CHOIR. WE HAD
SUNDAY SCHOOL, BIBLE
WE HAD SUNDAY SCHOOL,
BIBLE STUDY.
STUDY. AND EVERY OTHER
SUNDAY WE'D HAVE
AND EVERY OTHER SUNDAY WE'D
HAVE VOLLEYBALL AND THE YOUNG
VOLLEYBALL AND THE YOUNG
CHILDREN WOULD PLAY BASKETBALL
AND FOOTBALL BECAUSE THEY HAD
ENOUGH ROOM TO DO ALL THREE OF
ENOUGH ROOM TO DO ALL
THREE OF THOSE THINGS.
THOSE THINGS. IT
WAS TWO STORIES.
IT WAS TWO STORIES. WE SAT
ON 20,000 SQUARE FEET OF
WE SAT ON 20,000 SQUARE FEET
OF PROPERTY, IT WAS FIVE LOTS.
PROPERTY, IT WAS FIVE LOTS. SO
WE MOVED IN AND WE WERE IN IT
SO WE MOVED IN AND WE WERE
IN IT UNTIL KATRINA STRUCK.
UNTIL KATRINA STRUCK.
OH LORD, WE NEED YOU.
OH LORD, WE NEED YOU. >>
WE DON'T REALLY TALK ABOUT
>> WE DON'T REALLY
TALK ABOUT IT.
IT. WE KNOW WHAT
HAPPENED WHEN IT
WE KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
WHEN IT WENT THROUGH.
WENT THROUGH. IT'S NOTHING
ELSE WE COULD DO.
IT'S NOTHING ELSE WE COULD DO.
JUST THANK GOD, WE'RE STILL
JUST THANK GOD,
WE'RE STILL AROUND.
AROUND. A LOT OF PEOPLE
DIDN'T EVEN COME
A LOT OF PEOPLE DIDN'T
EVEN COME BACK.
BACK. I GUESS THEY
HAD NOTHING TO COME
I GUESS THEY HAD NOTHING
TO COME BACK TO.
BACK TO. >> WHEN WE
GOT TO THE CHURCH.
>> WHEN WE GOT TO THE CHURCH.
WE WENT UP THE STEPS AND OPENED
WE WENT UP THE STEPS
AND OPENED THE DOOR.
THE DOOR. THE PEWS
WERE PUSHED FORWARD.
THE PEWS WERE PUSHED FORWARD.
THE STAIRS TO ATTIC WAS DOWN.
THE STAIRS TO ATTIC WAS DOWN. IT
WAS JUST HEARTBREAKING TO SEE
IT WAS JUST HEARTBREAKING TO SEE
WHAT ALL YOU MINISTERED AND
WHERE THE KIDS PLAYED AND WHERE
WE WORSHIP AT, ALL DEVASTATED.
THE QUESTION WAS:
THE QUESTION WAS: "HOW
DO YOU GET THE CHURCH
"HOW DO YOU GET
THE CHURCH BACK?"
BACK?" ALL THE
CONGREGATION HAD BEEN
ALL THE CONGREGATION
HAD BEEN SCATTERED.
SCATTERED. AND IT TOOK
US A WHILE TO FIND
AND IT TOOK US A WHILE TO
FIND WE HAD 120 PEOPLE IN OUR
WE HAD 120 PEOPLE IN OUR
CONGREGATION AND NOW WE'RE DOWN
CONGREGATION AND NOW
WE'RE DOWN TO 49.
TO 49. I WOKE UP
ONE MORNING, ABOUT
I WOKE UP ONE MORNING, ABOUT
2:30, AND I WAS CRYING.
2:30, AND I WAS
CRYING. AND GOD SAID,
AND GOD SAID, "WHY
ARE YOU CRYING?"
"WHY ARE YOU CRYING?" I SAID,
I SAID, "GOD, YOU KNOW
WHY, GOD YOU KNOW
"GOD, YOU KNOW WHY, GOD
YOU KNOW WHY I AM CRYING.
WHY I AM CRYING. I AM
OUT OF PEOPLE, ANYTHING
I AM OUT OF PEOPLE, ANYTHING
THAT I CAN'T FIND THEM."
THAT I CAN'T FIND
THEM." AND HE SAID,
AND HE SAID, "I GOT IT."
"I GOT IT." "PLACE
IT INTO THE SEA OF
"PLACE IT INTO THE SEA OF
FORGETFULNESS, BUT WE'RE NEVER
HOMELESS ON OUR JUST DAY."
HOMELESS ON OUR JUST DAY." >>
OUR HOME WAS FINALLY REBUILT
>> OUR HOME WAS FINALLY
REBUILT IN 2009.
IN 2009. AND SO WHEN
WE MOVED IN, WE
AND SO WHEN WE MOVED IN, WE
STARTED HAVING SERVICES.
HERE IN THE HOME, TRYING TO
REBUILD THE CHURCH ON FLOOD
REBUILD THE CHURCH
ON FLOOD STREET.
STREET. I KNEW GOD
WOULD, SOME KIND OF
I KNEW GOD WOULD, SOME KIND OF
WAY, BRING IT BACK TOGETHER.
WAY, BRING IT BACK
TOGETHER. HE SAID:
HE SAID: "MY SON WHO
WAS LOST, NOW HE'S
"MY SON WHO WAS LOST,
NOW HE'S FOUND.
FOUND. AND THEREFORE THE WHOLE
AND THEREFORE THE WHOLE
HOUSEHOLD COULD REJOICE."
HOUSEHOLD COULD REJOICE." > I
>KNOW HE WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
> I >KNOW HE WOULD LIKE TO
HAVE THE CHURCH REBUILT.
THE CHURCH REBUILT. I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE IT REBUILT
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
IT REBUILT MYSELF.
MYSELF. I MISS THE
CHURCH, BUT THE
I MISS THE CHURCH, BUT THE
CHURCH IS IN YOUR HEART.
WHAT A FELLOWSHIP, WHAT A JOY
WHAT A FELLOWSHIP, WHAT A
JOY DIVINE, LEANING ON THE
DIVINE, LEANING ON
THE EVERLASTING ARM.
EVERLASTING ARM. >> I DON'T
CARE WHERE YOU'RE AT.
>> I DON'T CARE WHERE YOU'RE
AT. YOU CAN HAVE IT ON A TENT
YOU CAN HAVE IT ON
A TENT OUTSIDE.
OUTSIDE. YOU COULD
BE ON THE STREET.
YOU COULD BE ON THE STREET. IF
YOU'RE PRAISING GOD, HOUSE OR
IF YOU'RE PRAISING GOD, HOUSE
OR NO HOUSE, IT'S A BLESSING TO
NO HOUSE, IT'S A BLESSING
TO HAVE A PLACE TO GO.
HAVE A PLACE TO GO.
LEAN IN.
LEAN IN. >> ONE OF
THE THINGS THAT THE
>> ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT THE BIBLE SAYS IS:
BIBLE SAYS IS: "SPEAK
THOSE THINGS AS IF THEY
"SPEAK THOSE THINGS AS
IF THEY WERE ALREADY".
WERE ALREADY". AND I SEE
THE CHURCH, 'S TITHERE
AND I SEE THE CHURCH,
'S TITHERE IN MY MIND.
IN MY MIND. THERE IS
NO DOUBTHAT TGOD WILL
THERE IS NO DOUBTHAT
TGOD WILL RESTORE US.
RESTORE US.
>> WHAT I DO KNOW ABOUT PEOPLE
FROM NEW ORLEANS IS WE ALWAYS
FROM NEW ORLEANS IS
WE ALWAYS COME BACK.
COME BACK. THAT'S THE
UNIQUENESS OF OUR
THAT'S THE UNIQUENESS
OF OUR CULTURE.
CULTURE. IT'S THAT
I WANT TO BE HOME.
IT'S THAT I WANT TO BE
HOME. I AM COMING HOME.
I AM COMING HOME.
TWAS GRACE THAT BROUGHT ME
SAFE THUS FAR, AND GRACE, WILL
SAFE THUS FAR, AND GRACE,
WILL LEAD ME HOME.
LEAD ME HOME. >>
Woodruff: WHAT AN
>> Woodruff: WHAT
AN INSPIRATION.
INSPIRATION. THE
REVEREND SAID HE STILL
THE REVEREND SAID HE STILL
RAISED LESS THAN HALF THE MONEY
NEEDED TO REBUILD THE CHURCH,
BUT HE SAYS HE IS CONFIDENT IN
BUT HE SAYS HE IS CONFIDENT
IN ITS FULL RETURN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, WE TOLD YOU ABOUT TWO
TEENAGE BEST FRIENDS LAST
NOVEMBER WHO DREAMED OF MAKING
NOVEMBER WHO DREAMED OF
MAKING AN EPIC ZOMBIE MOVIE.
AN EPIC ZOMBIE MOVIE. AND
THEY SUCCEEDED, INSPIRING
AND THEY SUCCEEDED, INSPIRING
CELEBRITIES AND MOVIE PROS TO
CELEBRITIES AND MOVIE
PROS TO PITCH IN.
PITCH IN. THE
NEWSHOUR'S MIKE MELIA
THE NEWSHOUR'S MIKE MELIA
RETURNED TO VISIT THE GUYS ON
SET, TRANSFORMING FROM A MILD-
MANNERED REPORTER INTO A
HOLLYWOOD-WORTHY MONSTER.
HOLLYWOOD-WORTHY MONSTER. ALL
THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEB SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
SOME UPCOMING PROGRAMS
FROM OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES. GWEN
IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH
AIRS LATER THIS EVENING.
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
HERE'S A PREVIEW: >>
Ifill: AS THE ER WINDS
>> Ifill: AS THE ER WINDS
DOWN, POLITICAL TENSIONS RAMP
DOWN, POLITICAL
TENSIONS RAMP UP.
UP. WILL JOE BIDEN RUN?
WILL JOE BIDEN RUN? WILL
HILLARY CLINTON BE ABLE TO
WILL HILLARY CLINTON BE
ABLE TO KEEP HIM AT BAY?
KEEP HIM AT BAY? WILL
DONALD TRUMP'S BRAGGADOCIO
WILL DONALD TRUMP'S
BRAGGADOCIO KEEP HIM ON TOP?
KEEP HIM ON TOP? AND WILL
PRESIDENT OBAMA FACE A
AND WILL PRESIDENT OBAMA FACE A
WHOLE NEW RAFT OF CHALLENGES
WHOLE NEW RAFT OF
CHALLENGES AFTER LABOR DAY?
AFTER LABOR DAY? WE MIGHT
ACTUALLY HAVE AN ANSWER
WE MIGHT ACTUALLY HAVE
AN ANSWER OR TWO.
OR TWO. TONIGHT ON
"WASHINGTON WEEK."
TONIGHT ON "WASHINGTON
WEEK." JUDY?
JUDY? >> Woodruff:
ON PBS NEWSHOUR
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY: A LOOK AT SOME
OF THE NEW ORLEANS RESIDENTS
EVACUATED AFTER HURRICANE
KATRINA WHO HAVE NOT RETURNED.
>> I REALLY FEEL LIKE THIS
APARTMENT IN PEARL RIVER, IT'S A
APARTMENT IN PEARL RIVER,
IT'S A GROUNDING SPOT.
GROUNDING SPOT. THIS IS
HONESTLY THE FIRST TIME
THIS IS HONESTLY THE FIRST TIME
THAT I FELT THAT SINCE KATRINA.
IT'S STILL EMPTY IN A LOT OF WAY
BECAUSE THE LIFE THAT I KNOW IS
BECAUSE THE LIFE THAT
I KNOW IS NO MORE.
NO MORE. SHORTLY
BEFORE KATRINA MY DAD
SHORTLY BEFORE KATRINA MY DAD
DIED, AND THEN KATRINA HAPPENED,
AND EVERYTHING I KNEW, YOU KNOW-
- SCHOOL, WORK, HOUSE, FAMILY--
LIKE IT WAS JUST COMPLETELY
LIKE IT WAS JUST
COMPLETELY ANNIHILATED.
ANNIHILATED. EVERYTHING CHANGED.
EVERYTHING CHANGED. EVERYTHING
WAS JUST RIPPED AWAY
EVERYTHING WAS JUST RIPPED
AWAY IN AN INSTANT.
IN AN INSTANT. >>
Woodruff: THAT'S TOMORROW
>> Woodruff: THAT'S TOMORROW
NIGHT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND WE'LL BE BACK, RIGHT HERE,
ON MONDAY WITH AMY WALTERS AND
TAMARA KEITH, BRINGING YOU THE
LATEST ON THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL
LATEST ON THE 2016
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
CAMPAIGN. THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT. I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A GREAT WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.